Joseph H. Friedman: Wealthy Westerners should fund vaccines

KIGALI, Rwanda The head of the World Health Organization once again denounced the large pharmaceutical corporations for not having created an Ebola vaccine. As she noted, they put profit over everything....

The head of the World Health Organization once again denounced the large pharmaceutical corporations for not having created an Ebola vaccine. As she noted, they put profit over everything. No surprise there, as this is, alas, how capitalism works.

If corporations are people, as Mitt Romney seemed to believe, they are money-making, amoral people and few are dedicated to the public good. Some, perhaps many, companies have the public good as their mission, but the mission of most corporations is to maximize return for the shareholders. It is not to help poor or sick people. It is not to improve quality of life. It is not to clean the environment.

I believe that the resource-rich West has been remiss in almost every way in its dealings with the poor countries. These countries only seem to exist when there’s a problem or some group has a politically important base in the United States.

Ebola was not a Western problem until Americans contracted it. Western aid to the poor, which may sound like a lot in terms of dollars, is minuscule and often is used to reward the lender, by forcing the borrower to buy American products, thereby rewarding American interest groups under the guise of helping the poor.

However, unlike the WHO, I do not believe the pharmaceutical corporations are obliged to create vaccines or therapies for the common good. It would be nice if they did, but this is not their mission. I do not say this lightly. I just don’t think that pharmaceutical companies are different than other corporations.

Even doctors turn away poor patients. Are large contractors obligated to build housing for poor people? Do we expect Toyota to give cars to poor people because they can’t find a job unless they have a car? Should a private corporation be obliged to help the poor? Should manufacturers of sewage treatment plants be forced to create plants in an impoverished area with sewage problems, which would probably be medically much more cost effective than developing vaccines anyway?

It is true that drug companies have developed vaccines. Companies that develop vaccines have gotten waivers against lawsuits that may occur if adequate safety testing did not reveal evidence of rare side effects. In addition, the government has subsidized pharmaceutical research and development for vaccines.

Most Americans, and probably the vast majority of the world’s population, believe that the development of vaccines for poor regions and treatment for diseases of poor areas is a responsibility of wealthy governments, whether the problem is within their country or not. They should also fund the research independently of, or in collaboration with, pharmaceutical companies.

This is about more than the obvious good of enhancing health. Epidemics, even in poor areas, may destabilize large regions of the world and lead to chaos and terrorism, posing a threat to national security. Even the possibility of Ebola’s spreading to the United States caused terror in our country, leading to a large outlay of money for training, treatment and disease assessment, and quarantine.

In the case of Ebola, the outlay for a response, while very large, may not equal the investment required for a vaccine. On the other hand, such an investment would certainly be seen as a wise one if failing to create a vaccine permits an epidemic in the United States.

There is no reason the wealthy world cannot come together to develop vaccines or better treatments for the major killers in the world: malaria, TB, cholera and some minor ones as well, such as Ebola. Until the Ebola scare, U.S. government investment in vaccines actually dropped over the last few years.

The reader should be aware that I have received money for consultations from pharmaceutical corporations and hedge funds, as well as research funds from drug companies. I used to give promotional talks, but no longer, because of hospital bylaws.

Joseph H. Friedman, M.D., is editor in chief of the Rhode Island Medical Journal. He wrote this in Kigali, Rwanda, where he was a visiting neurology professor at the Teaching Hospital of Kigali.