Catholic clerics renew fight against tetanus jab

Nairobi Archbishop John Cardinal Njue led hundreds of Catholic clerics in a renewed onslaught against State-led tetanus vaccination, asking thousands of church faithful in Mombasa not to accept the jab.

The church leaders spoke yesterday at the installation of Bishop Martin Kivuva as the new Archbishop of the Catholic Archdiocese of Mombasa. They criticised political leaders for failure to bridge widening religious and tribal differences and called on the Government to tackle the problem of drug abuse in Mombasa, saying many youth have been turned into zombies.

The leaders, in their message christened “That All Be One” said the country was at a crossroad and theological and ideological differences among Christians and Muslims was widening. Cardinal Njue said the controversial tetanus vaccination “was being pushed from somewhere else,” adding, “we will not fear fighting for our dignity.” “It is suspect that this vaccine is targeting women. We must be courageous enough to say No,” he told the faithful at Mombasa Stadium. He also criticised the push to introduce contraceptives to primary school children, saying the move was a sign the country had lost its morals.

The Catholic church has been opposed to the Government-led tetanus vaccination, forcing the State to form a taskforce to investigate the church’s claims that the jab was a ploy to introduce a family planning vaccination. Last week, Murang’a Bishop James Wainaina who is also in charge of the Health Commission for the Kenya Conference of Catholic Bishops told a media briefing that their findings had revealed the jab was laced with contraceptives for family planning.

There was heavy security at the stadium during the ceremony also attended by Machakos Governor Alfred Mutua and his Taita Taveta counterpart John Mruttu. Others were Mombasa Deputy Governor Hazel Katana, Nyali MP Hezron Awiti and several MPs from Machakos County. Archbishop Kivuva comes to the region when it is facing challenges of radicalisation against the youth.

Yesterday, Archbishop Kivuva, who was initially a priest in the region before being posted to Nairobi to work for Ukweli video productions and later as Bishop of Machakos, said he will strive to strengthen the interfaith religious group in the region to combat radicalisation. He added that the few clerics advancing the Islamists ideology had little knowledge of Islam.

He said the region has suffered economically due to insecurity and radicalisation, adding that he will establish an interface section to bring together religious, political and professional groups to tackle the problem. “As religious leaders we cannot allow ourselves to be swallowed by traditional fights that characterised our religions in the past,” he said.

He said there was need for coast people to value one another and bury tribal and religious differences. Mombasa has witnessed a relatively calm period since last year when it was rocked by acts of terror-related insecurity it blamed on controversial ideologies preached by a section of radical Muslim clerics.

Yesterday, the Anglican Church of Kenya Mombasa Diocese Bishop Julius Kalu welcomed Kivuva, saying he will lead the Catholic Church and Christians in the region to combat radicalisation and terrorism.

“Archbishop Kivuva comes to the region when as Christians we look up to the Catholic church to lead in uniting Christians in the fight against radicalisation and insecurity,” said Bishop Kalu.

Kivuva comes with a wider knowledge about the region, having served as a priest in various churches in the archdiocese of Mombasa. He was first appointed an assistant priest in Mwatate Parish in Taita Taveta County in 1979 before he was transferred to Kongowea, Mombasa to serve as the priest of Our Lady of Fatma Parish where he at the same time officiated as the chaplain to Kenya Armed Forces in Nyali Barracks.

Between 1989 and 1992, he worked as a social communication coordinator for the Archdiocese of Mombasa.