Myths About "Anti-Vaxxers" that Need to be Debunked. NOW.

There has been a ton of media hubbub over the measles outbreak that has been birthed out of the land of happiness aka Disneyland. The disease is making a cross-country migration and is now being found in some mid-western states. There have been nearly 100 cases and (thankfully) no deaths. The culprits? Those darn "anti-vaxxers" of course! They MUST be the cause of such a preventable outbreak.

Unfortunately, there is no political correctness when it comes to talking about these families who refuse to vaccinate their children. Thus, they are subject to public shaming by the media, peers and even by our very own here on BlogHer (gasp! here and here to name a couple). Speak out about ANY minority in a negative way and you're automatically labelled a racist, bigot, homophobe, etc. Speak out against anti-vaxxers? You're a proper American citizen.

With all that said, I felt that it was time to shed some light on some myths that I've seen circulating through the media and the messages boards concerning parents who don't vaccinate their children. Please keep in mind that this is NOT an article meant to start any debate or to say one side is better than the other. I'm speaking a lot from personal experience to show that we (WHAT?! I'm one of them??!?) are normal people just like the rest of the American public who are navigating this life trying to do what we feel is best for our children and our families. I'm not hating on anyone and I'm not angry. Just trying to have a good time and bring some balance to the media circus that's been performing recently. (Trapeze, anyone?)

Myth #1: All anti-vaxxers are anti-vaccination and think they are evil.

I really detest the term "anti-vaxxer" because it's lumping a large, diverse group of people into a narrow category. There are people who fit that bill, but a lot of parents delay vaccinations, vaccinate on a schedule that spreads them out and some would vaccinate if their children were able to be vaccinated. I personally don't think vaccines are evil. I know they've done a lot of good and saved lives, but they are honestly being undeservedly worshiped in our culture. They are a man-made medical advance just like all the other pharmaceuticals out there. What does that mean? People aren't perfect and neither are their products. Did you know that over the counter sleep aids and Benedryl, among other OTC meds, are linked to a greater risk for dementia? If something as simple as non-prescription medicine can be so dangerous for adults, then why is it wrong to question the safety of vaccines? They have individual components that are more harmful than OTC meds, they are injected directly into the body - not dissolved over 4-8 hours - and they are being put into babies and young children. I'm not anti-vaccination. I'm pro-vaccine-safety. Vaccines aren't one-size-fits-all and are therefore more dangerous for different people. A great organization that is pro-vaccine-safety is the National Vaccine Information Center (NVIC). They provide reasonable, unbiased information about vaccines that is beneficial to any family who want to vaccinate or don't want to vaccinate their children.

Myth #2: Anti-vaxxers get all their info on vaccines from Jenny McCarthy and Andrew Wakefield.

Hahaha! Sorry I just had to laugh at that one. Really, it's funny seeing how many people believe that every parent in every part of the country who decides to not vaccinate or delay vaccination is some cult follower of Jenny McCarthy or has only heard of Dr. Andrew Wakefield and his debunked MMR-autism study. There are plenty of resources out there who are exposing the truth about vaccines and how dangerous they are. As I mentioned before, the NVIC is one of them. There's also the World Association for Vaccine Education (WAVE), Think Twice Global Vaccine Institute and Vaccination News - an organization that publishes current news articles and studies that are on both sides of the vaccine debate. Those are just a few of the many resources out there.

Myth #3: Anti-vaxxers are selfish and irresponsible, willingly exposing their children AND others to deadly diseases.

There will always be irresponsible people anywhere. BUT if you ask the average parent who hasn't vaccinated their child why they are making that choice, they will likely share stories from the tragic experience of having a vaccine injured child or the many reasons that the organizations above present that show that vaccines aren't as safe as the media and medical community portray them to be. And PLEASE. What person would willingly expose their own child or someone else's child to an illness on purpose? This past fall, I visited a friend who had a one month old baby. My youngest (who was 1 at the time; he just turned 2) had just started coughing during the night, so I left him home with my husband. It's common courtesy. I don't want my own kids to get sick, so why would I want to infect someone else's? I mean, really, who does that? Does the public actually think that I'm parading my kids around looking for a way to get them sick? Do vaccinating parents parade their kids around illness to prove the shots work? No, of course not. We're not willingly trying to get our kids sick and we're sure as heck not trying to get anyone else's kids sick. It's not irresponsible to make an informed decision about my own child's healthcare. Vaccines are a choice, not a mandate. The CDC only "recommends" them anyway, am I right? The last time someone "recommended" something to me, I knew I was free to decline it if I wished.

Myth #4: Parents who don't vaccinate think they're children are more important than yours.

For real? What I think is implied in this myth is, "I've made the sacrifice of vaccinating my child for the good of society, so every other parent must too. No child is better than another." Yes, no child is above another in the sense that one doesn't deserve certain privileges over other children. But are parents implying that by not vaccinating their kids? No! We're doing what we believe is best for our children. Yes, I like my children more than yours - because I'm their mom. Yes, I love my children more than yours - because I'm their mom. If both of our kids are in a burning building and I can only save one, would I pick my own? Of course! Because I'm his MOM. What parent isn't biased toward their own child? But still, if my kid hits yours or misbehaves in public, I'll take action on your child's behalf! I love my children a lot, but I'm not unreasonable and I don't think my children deserve anything better than your children. We're all trying to do the best we can for our own families.

Myth #5: All anti-vaxxers are hippies, affluent and gluten free.

Now this one seems a bit contradictory because I have't heard of any rich hippies. Unless they were a hippie celebrity. Or the child of a celebrity. But there's this assumption that parents who don't vaccinate are rich or hippies or totally natural in their food choices. While a lot of non-vaccinating families might fall into one or more of these categories, it by no means describes everyone. I have a lot of close friends who don't vaccinate or have delayed vaccination and they are not hippies. Nor are they rich. Some are gluten free though. Which is fine. But to make not vaccinating sound like a trend? No. Definitely not a trend. (Side note: Being gluten free isn't a trend either. It's starting to be trendy, but some people get seriously messed up by that stuff. Not fun. Total respect to people who go without gluten.) Why would someone willingly sign up to shamed by the... um... ENTIRE COUNTRY just to be "cool?" The last time I heard, that doesn't describe something cool or trendy. This isn't a trend. It's a serious life decision that isn't made or taken lightly - no matter what a person's background.

Myth #6: Anti-vaxxers' kids are doomed to die. Doomed!

There has been a pervading assumption that children who are not vaccinated or are on a delayed schedule are these ticking time bombs waiting to go off and infect everybody or die. Like these kids are walking around just waiting to be infected. But choosing not to vaccinate is not a death sentence for a child. The incidence of these diseases are far lower than they were in the past, even with the epidemics that pop up every now and then. And there are credible doctors speaking out about how there is no reason to panic even about the current measles outbreak (here and here). If you would like to read a well cited and scientific article about measles and the history of the vaccine, then click here. With proper nutrition alone, a non-vaccinated child would most likely be able to fight off illness without even needing any medical intervention.

Myth #7: Parents who don't vaccinate are foregoing vaccinations necessary for survival.

Now I know this myth sounds similar to the previous one, but it is different in this way - not all of the "recommended" vaccines are necessary for a child's survival. Example? The Hepatitis B vaccine. First given at birth, then around 1-2 months of age and finally between 6-18 months of age, this vaccine seriously is pointless. When I was pregnant with our first son and researching all about vaccines, because I wanted to think objectively on the matter, I went to the experts themselves and realized how unnecessary this shot is. The CDC says that babies whose mothers are infected can be infected at birth. They also say that children, adolescents and adults can get infected through bodily fluids, breaks in the skin, sharing toothbrushes, razors or diabetes monitoring devices, having unprotected sex and sharing needles when injecting drugs. Okay. So let's think critically about this - babies could only get infected if their moms are sick. Since when does that mean that every baby should get injected then if only a few moms might have Hep B? Also, what child between birth and 18 months is going to be sexually active or using drugs? Furthermore, yes, they could perhaps maybe get infected if they were around a sick person and came in contact with that person's bodily fluids. However, with proper supervision, that child shouldn't. I'm not letting my 18 month old or younger child play with my own toothbrush let alone anyone else's. So yes. Hep B = ridiculous for the vast majority of babies.

But what about the measles vaccine and pertussis and all the other ones? Yes, there are scary diseases out there. But we now live in an age with exceptional medical care and proper sanitation. A lot of these diseases were already on the decline beforevaccines were introduced, but the vaccines got the credit because they road the wave into shore as it was dying down.

Myth #8: Anti-vaxxers are exhibiting parental neglect and child endangerment by not vaccinating.

To this I say, "Pfffft!!! Hahaha!" Really? This isn't a joke? Oh. Ok. This one is preposterous at best and terrifying at worst. Parents have the right to choose how to care for and raise their children. I'm the one that knows my child best - not doctors, not the CDC - me. And my husband. We know our kids and we are the ones who decide what goes into their bodies. The same goes for parents who choose to vaccinate. If that's you, you have that right. Just because we disagree with people who are pro-vaccines doesn't mean that we aren't fit to be parents. I'm not saying parents on either side are better or worse than the other. A lot of non-vaccinating families eat healthier because they've learned that proper nutrition = proper health. Food was made to heal our bodies. We are taking great care to ensure our children are nourished properly so that their little bodies are capable of fighting illness in its own power. I personally think that parents who don't vaccinate their kids are somewhat at an advantage in a way because if their child gets sick, they aren't assuming a safety net of excluding certain illnesses. What I mean is that when my kids sick, my radar goes way up. I'm constantly monitoring them to make sure they aren't beginning to show symptoms of something more serious. I don't think, "Well, they can't have this because they received that shot." And I'm not saying vaccinated parents think that way. It just helps me to always be on the look out. I have a mental check list in my mind of symptoms that warrant a trip to the ER. So does proper nutrition and parental supervision count as neglect or endangerment? Umm no. Not at all.

Myth #9: Anti-vaxxers aren't performing their civic duty to vaccinate their children.

My duty is to my family first and then my country. This isn't about calling parents to perform some patriotic responsibility so much as it is just a way to guilt families into compromising their convictions and beliefs on vaccines to be a "better" citizen. It's manipulation and it's uncalled for. I can see why people would believe it though. It makes sense. But at its root, the idea of "doing your duty" by getting vaccinated really just takes away a parent's freedom to choose how to take care of their child. Vaccination is a choice. Not a mandate. Not a duty. It is a decision that parents should make for their own children without being treated like they are subhuman for thinking differently than the vast majority.

Myth #10: Anti-vaxxers blindly believe whatever they are told about vaccines.

On the contrary, parents who question and investigate the safety of vaccines aren't just believing what ever they're told about them. We dig and dig and dig some more because the evidence is out there that shows what vaccines are really like. It's not on the media because: public shaming. Just because Yahoo News or Huffington Post isn't publishing articles about the dangers of vaccines or the countless families who have injured child(ren) because of them, doesn't mean these stories aren't out there or are false. I find it quite humorous and ironic that "anti-vaxxers" are being accused of the very thing that the majority of the public is already doing. You know, because none of the articles about the Disney measles outbreak are sensationalized or over hyped at all. All the flu vaccine articles that come out around October aren't like propaganda at all... At least the media was honest about how ineffective it was this year! That's a first!

Myth #11: Parents who don't vaccinate hate the parents that do. Hate I say!

Heck no! I'm sure a lot of parents delaying or opting out of vaccination would agree with me when I say that I don't hate or judge any parent who chooses to vaccinate their children. That is your choice and yours alone to make. If you believe that is what's best for your family, then go for it. Like I said, I don't think vaccines are evil. I respect your decision to be the parent of your own child. We deserve to be respected too. We're parents just like everybody else trying to do what we feel is best for our family. It's despicable that our society isn't mature enough to handle a civil, objective and open discussion on this matter. The media are the ones who should be shamed for how terribly they have treated innocent families throughout this debacle. I know that there have been ugly words said from both sides of the vaccine debate, but I can assure you that the majority of parents who don't vaccinate or delay vaccination totally respect the parents that have fully vaccinated kids. I would still be friends with you. And if my kids were sick? I would keep them home.

No matter where you stand on the issue of vaccines, I encourage you to watch an incredible documentary called The Greater Good. It mostly follows the story of how a teenage girl's life was affected by the HPV vaccine and discusses openly and honestly the truth about how safe vaccines really are.

On a final note, I would like to say thank you for reading. Blessings on you and please be kind in the comments. Please rise above the societal norm and show some kindness and understanding to people on either side of this complicated issue.