Reviewers in uproar over book: “Melanie’s Marvelous Measles”

I can think of a lot of words to describe measles. But “marvelous” definitely isn’t one of them.

And yet, this book actually exists:

Yes, for just $11.74, you too can be the proud owner of the exhilarating children’s tale, Melanie’s Marvelous Measles!

While I have not had the privilege of reading the unfortunately-titled book in its entirety, this is how Australian author Stephanie Messenger describes it:

“Melanie’s Marvelous Measles was written to educate children on the benefits of having measles and how you can heal from them naturally and successfully. Often today, we are being bombarded with messages from vested interests to fear all diseases in order for someone to sell some potion or vaccine, when, in fact, history shows that in industrialized countries, these diseases are quite benign and, according to natural health sources, beneficial to the body. Having raised three children vaccine-free and childhood disease-free, I have experienced many times when my children’s vaccinated peers succumb to the childhood diseases they were vaccinated against. Surprisingly, there were times when my unvaccinated children were blamed for their peers’ sickness. Something which is just not possible when they didn’t have the diseases at all.”

Written back in 2012, Melanie’s Marvelous Measles has now resurfaced in the midst of alarming clusters of measles in the United States. The book’s renewed attention has also inspired nearly 1,200 (wildly disapproving) Amazon customer reviews. Here are some of the most “helpful” ones, for your enjoyment:

1) There’s nothing quite like preparing your children for their impending doom!

2) The author’s website “may contain a virus.” How ironic.

3) Hey, at least this lady is reaping the benefits of Messenger’s message.

4) Well, this is just rude.

5) This reviewer provides some helpful suggestions for riveting sequels!

6) What, no Braille version?

7) Actually, I think this review pretty much sums it up:

No matter which side of the vaccination debate you’re on, I doubt most people would choose the word “marvelous” to describe measles.

Just no.

Share your thoughts!

What do you think of this book’s title/concept? Do you find the reviews as entertaining as I did?