Italian Courts in Milan Concluded MMR Vaccine Causes Autism

(TRFW News) In the conventional medical system, vaccine is heavily promoted and touted as a necessity for a child’s life. This is perhaps one of the reasons why many parents do not think twice when they take their child in for vaccinations, which may have a life-altering or life-ending consequence in a child’s health more than one can expect.

In just under a year ago, on September 23, 2014, the Italian courts in Milan awarded compensation to a young boy for vaccine-induced autism. (1,2) The side effects of Measles-Mumps-Rubella (MMR) vaccine has been known in the last 15 years and a considerable amount of attention has been circulating in other parts of the world, yet the U.S. has been silent about this. (1,3)

In 2012, Italian courts ruled MMR causes autism

On May 23rd, 2012, Jude Lucio Ardigo of an Italian court in Rimini concluded that the MMR vaccine had caused the 15-month old boy to develop autism. (4) The boy received MMR vaccinations at 15-month of age in 2004 and immediately his parents noticed bowel issues, refusing to eat, and a change of behavior. It quickly went downhill and the child eventually received an autism diagnosis with cognitive delay within a year. (1)

The boy’s parents immediately suspected the vaccination was the cause, but they were told that it was “impossible.” The parents decided to fight and initially were denied compensation by the Ministry of Health’s compensation program. However, after valid medical evidence, the court found that the boy had “has been irreversibly damaged by complications caused by vaccination (prophylaxis trivalent MMR).” (4)

The boy and his family was awarded a 15-year annuity totaling 174,000 Euros, which is just under $220,000, plus additional reimbursements from all court costs. The news has been featured in the Italian press and later an article was published in the UK, but the U.S. press did nothing. (3)

Luca Ventaloro the family lawyer, stated: “This is very significant for Britain which uses, and has used, an MMR vaccine with the same components as the one given to Valentino. It is wrong for governments and their health authorities to exert strong pressure on parents to take children for the MMR jab while ignoring that this vaccine can cause autism and linked conditions.” (5)

MMR research proved accurate, yet seen as “controversial”

Dr. Andrew Wakefield, a former British surgeon and medical researcher, suggested a correlation between the MMR vaccine, chronic bowel disease, and autism. This research was published in the journal The Lancet in 1998. Ever since this publication, much controversy arose causing it to be one of the most controversial studies on the topic of vaccine safety. (6,7)

Many public health officials or doctors ignored the fact about what Wakefield’s research actually showed and 28 other studies from around the world that back up his findings. As a result, Wakefield’s research was “discredited” by the medical officials in Britain causing his reputation to be destroyed. (6)

Even though Wakefield’s 1998 study is the only known study, there have been many other studies published around the world that were all peer-reviewed and supported Wakefield’s findings. While none of those studies were withdrawn, it was never discussed in the U.S. media. (6)

For example, at the 2006 International Meeting for Autism Research, Steve Walker, Ph.D., shared a finding that confirmed Dr. Wakefield’s research. Walker and a group of researchers from Wake Forest University School of Medicine in North Carolina conducted a study that examined children with regressive autism and bowel disease. (8)

A total of 82 patients were tested at the time and 70 were found positive for the vaccine strain of the measles virus in the gastrointestinal tract. This study suggests a link between the MMR vaccine in the digestive tract, chronic bowel inflammation, and symptoms of regressive autism. (8) This finding was exactly the same the Dr. Wakefield discovered in 1998.

Contradiction between Italian and U.S. courts

There is a difference in court decisions between the Italian and U.S. courts. The Omnibus Autism Proceeding, the court assigned three Special Masters decision makers to resolve the autism cases. These Special Masters concluded that vaccines do not cause autism in any of the six cases they tested. Clearly, the Italian courts strikingly contrasts the U.S. courts based on similar claims. (9,10)

When it comes to vaccines, it is perhaps wise to be educated on all the potential benefits and risks in order to decide what is the best course of action for your child.