'Tis the season … for the flu

STAUNTON Retail isn't the only business seeing a December bump in activity. Valley hospitals and doctor's offices are flooding with sick patients as Virginia and the rest of the country experience an unusually severe flu season.

"Within the last two weeks, we've seen a dramatic increase in flu reporting for our district," said Jonathan Falk, District Epidemiologist of the Staunton-Augusta Health Dept. "If our state mirrors the national trend, it's predominately the Influenza type A H3 virus."

H3 viruses are among several strains that flu vaccines are designed to protect against. But, said Falk, a new H3 wrinkle appeared this season that the vaccines didn't anticipate.

"Generally, because of the time frame for producing the vaccines, they have to target the strain in January or February. It wasn't until late March that we started to see this new drift of H3," Falk explained.

In health care-speak, the H3 Texas strain is what was expected when the year's flu shots were formulated – the variants are named for the place they were discovered, Falk said – but we're being hit with a mutant H3 Switzerland strain instead.

Bottom line: While this year's flu vaccines cover some of the flu strains out there, they aren't as effective for what's ailing many people right now.

"One of my sisters-in-law has been hospitalized at RMH because of the flu," Priscilla Melchior told The News Leader by e-mail. "I'm told that the emergency room is jammed and that medical staff members -- all wearing masks -- are slammed due to the volume of flu patients suffering with the dreaded A strain."

"We've seen a significant uptick in the last two weeks in both flu A and flu B, said Dr. Rob Marble, emergency room medical director at Rockingham Memorial Hospital. "A number of cases have required hospitalization, including very young and elderly patients."

As of today, RMH is recommending masks for all visitors coming into the facility, reported hospital spokeswoman Jenn Downs.

Augusta Health, too, has had some critically ill and hospitalized patients, according to Dr. Allison Baroco, an infectious disease specialist at the hospital. "There's no rhyme or reason of knowing when flu season will peak, and unfortunately, it's hitting now," Baroco said.

Due to the increasing flu cases, Augusta Health is asking visitors to wear masks on entering the hospital. The masks are available at the main entrances and on each of the inpatient nursing units.

Nationally, about 70 percent of the population is coming down with the H3 Switzerland form of Influenza A virus, Falk said. When H3 dominates, it's always a worse-than-usual flu season.

The burden is falling mostly on young people in our area, Barocco observed. But across the country, cases have spiked 500 percent in the past few weeks among people over 65, according to Centers for Disease Control and Prevention reports.

Despite the lesser effectiveness of this year's flu vaccines, both Baroco and Falk recommend them because they provide coverage for other flu strains that could hit later in the season.

"Prevention is the number one thing we're stressing," Falk said. In other words, wash your hands often. Don't send the kids to school if they're sick or try to be a hero by showing up sick at the office.

And skip the holiday party?

"Correct," Falk said. "If you need it as an excuse, we support that."