What others are saying about Christie's vaccination remarks

TRENTON — Gov. Chris Christie's comments today over whether children should be vaccinated sparked a wave of reaction across the web.

Christie, a potential candidate for the Republican nomination for president, told reporters during a trade mission to England that "parents need to have some measure of choice" on whether their children are immunized. Kevin Roberts, a spokesman for the governor's office, clarified Christie's position, saying "the governor believes vaccines are an important public health protection and with a disease like measles there is no question kids should be vaccinated."

Here is a roundup of what publications are saying about the comments:

TIME: Chris Christie's Terrible Vaccine Advice

Jeffrey Kluger, an editor-at-large for the magazine, writes that "when it comes to medicine, the current governor, former prosecutor and never doctor evidently feels pretty free to dispense advice. And doncha' know it? That advice turns out to be terrible."

Washington Post: What Chris Christie gets wrong about vaccine deniers

Paul Waldman writes that "it's great that Christie vaccinated his children, but it's also completely irrelevant. And what he thinks as a parent is absolutely not more important than what he thinks as a public official. Want to know why? Because he's a public official."

New York Magazine: Chris Christie: Scientists Have a Point About Vaccines, But So Do Crazy People

Jonathan Chalt writes that "for the first time in a public career defined by overweening and often-bullying certainty about everything, Christie has finally found an issue where he sees both sides. And it's an issue where science and public health are utterly unanimous!"

The Atlantic: Courting the Anti-Vax Vote

David A. Graham writes that Christie "is being derided as a 'vexer,' but his statement is a little more nuanced than he's getting credit for."

The Onion: Chris Christie On Vaccines: Parents Should Have 'Measure Of Choice'

The satirical site asks others what they think about Christie's comments. "Interesting. I didn't know Iowa voters felt that way about vaccinations," one man says.

And here is a look at what some are saying on Twitter:

Taking vaccination advice from Chris Christie is like taking advice from me about how to do a perfect sit-up.

— Patton Oswalt (@pattonoswalt) February 2, 2015
Insane. Christie is done. RT @jaketapper: Christie: We vaccinate our kids, but it's parental choice http://t.co/mrwWuicKQn

— Campbell Brown (@campbell_brown) February 2, 2015
Haven't the adult anti-vaccination people all been vaccinated themselves? Why then deny their children equal protection?

— Joyce Carol Oates (@JoyceCarolOates) February 2, 2015
Not dinging Christie because I have another dog in the 2016 fight. It's because this statement is wildly irresponsible for a public figure.

— Rick Wilson (@TheRickWilson) February 2, 2015
Chris Christie's vaccination problem, explained in 1 chart. http://t.co/7rlsZWVnD6 pic.twitter.com/nGnAQ76p3F

— Chris Cillizza (@TheFix) February 2, 2015