Do llamas hold the secret to HIV vaccination?

The search for a vaccine against HIV has been frustrated by difficulties in generating a sufficient neutralising antibody response in humans to vaccine candidates. However, progress is being made by various innovative approaches including use of the unusual model animal, the llama. A new study in the journal PLOS Pathogens shows that immunised llamas produce a combination of neutralising antibodies that together destroy all members of a panel of 60 viruses.

Llamas are unusual in that in addition to the bulky two-light chain and two-heavy chain antibodies produced in other mammals including humans, they also produce heavy chain only antibodies (HCAbs). These are isolated as individual variable regions (VHH). Previous studies had shown that the VHH J3 was produced in llamas in response to immunisation with gp140 trimers of HIV. These trimers are cleaved, solubilised versions part of the HIV-1 Env protein, which is responsible for binding to CD4 on human cells and initiating infection. In the current study, the research team immunised a further two llamas with the aim of identifying further novel neutralising antibodies induced in response to immunisation.

Using a high-throughput screening method of more than 6000 clones, the researchers identified a further three neutralising HCAbs. These targeted different regions of the CD4-binding site and worked extra potently when used together to give 100% coverage against a panel of 60 viruses. The research team also carried out a method called deep sequencing of the HIV-binding regions of the antibodies. They found that these antibodies were only fully matured in response to immunisation. They were not detectable pre-immunisation or after only one vaccination round, but emerged after repeated exposure to the vaccine. The sequencing revealed that although all the antibodies have functional similarities, they have distinct sequences.

The results of this study are encouraging in the context of recent concepts in the field of HIV vaccine development which suggest the necessity of induction of multiple neutralising antibody lineages for production of an antibody-based vaccine and a potential need to combine purified monoclonal antibodies for therapy or prophylaxis. The neutralising antibodies produced in the immunised llamas were produced at low concentrations and would therefore not meet the criteria for a protective vaccine. However, the researchers point out that the generation of four broadly neutralizing antibodies induced by vaccination has not been achieved in any other species. Their results, they say, “show that immunization can induce potent and broadly neutralizing antibodies in llamas with features similar to human antibodies, and provide a framework to analyze the effectiveness of immunization protocols.”

Science news reference:
Molecular Evolution of Broadly Neutralizing Llama Antibodies to the CD4-Binding Site of HIV-1. McCoy LE, Rutten L, Frampton D, Anderson I, Granger L, et al. (2014) PLoS Pathog 10(12): e1004552. doi:10.1371/journal.ppat.1004552.

Image Credit: Wikipedia