Why I chose not to vaccinate my child

TERRE HAUTE, Ind. (WTHI) – The measles outbreak is sparking a national debate. Should parents be required to vaccinate their children?

You may be surprised that a large percentage of children in the Wabash Valley have not been immunized.

Only 28 percent of children between the ages of 19 -35 months have received their vaccinations, that’s according to the Vigo County Health Department. Those parents who have decided against vaccines are receiving backlash.

When it comes to her anti-vaccination stance, Natalie Garland knows full well that she’s in the minority.

“I think there’s a common misconception that if you don’t immunize your children than you’re an idiot who can’t face the facts.”

Garland argues it’s just the opposite. During her pregnancy it was facts and hours of discussion that lead to the controversial decision not to vaccinate her now two-year old daughter Luci.

“It wasn’t a knee jerk reaction because of Jenny McCarthy on the View,” said Garland.

Instead, what she found was research that left too many unanswered questions.

“It was just something that we didn’t have a level of comfort with. It didn’t feel like it solved enough problems to take on the unknowns of what could be,” said Garland.

Once eliminated, measles is now back in full force and has sickened more than 150 people. Health officials believe the vaccine is the only way to eliminate the disease once again.

“It has been proven over, and over, and over again that this is a safe vaccine. This vaccine has saved millions of lives,” said John Bolinger, Chief Medical Officer at Union Hospital.

Despite the measles being highly contagious, Garland doesn’t fear her daughter will contract the disease.

“I can give her the best health foundation possible with the foods I give her and the nutrients I give her,” said Garland.

As for those claiming its part of parents civic duty to have their children immunized, Garland doesn’t believe her daughter is a danger to those with weaker immune systems.

“When you’re making a decision for your family you still have to do what’s best for your inner circle.”

Garland remains firm that she doesn’t feel guilty for her decision.

“Go with what you feel is best for your family and if you’re doing that then I don’t think you should have anybody trying to attack you for that choice.”

The health department continues to urge all parents to vaccinate their children.