US Government Caught Freezing Vaccine Petition Regarding People To Have Own Free Choice

At the moment, there seem to be many dirty tactics being used against people who are questioning the necessity for vaccination. One of the most intense – and a direct hit to our human rights – has happened in the last few days.

A WhiteHouse.gov petition was started last week calling for the prohibition of mandatory vaccine laws to be abolished, to allow us to have our choice in relation to the vaccines we receive or choose to have given to our children.

It has been a long-standing rule that petitions to the government must be acknowledged and responded to once they hit 100,000 signatures.

This particular petition regarding vaccine choice has remained “stuck” at 56,791 signatures. This last count of signatures in a petition which is steadily gaining momentum was from midday Friday (27 February) and now as I check – today being Sunday 1 March – it is STILL stuck at 56,791.

Natural News wrote:

The petition reads:

No human being should be FORCED to be vaccinated against their will and/or personal/religious beliefs. I petition against making vaccinations of any kind mandatory. This includes forcing children to be vaccinated to attend public schools, activities, and daycare centers. This also includes adults working in the public or private sector.

The petition still allows people to sign it, and it still sends a confirmation email that claims your signature counts. But the numbers on the petition website never change, no matter how many people sign it.

You can see for yourself here:

This is truly outrageous and speaks volumes about what the government really thinks in relation to us having any personal choice in the future, and about what we or our children are given in terms of vaccinations.

Have a think about this for a moment and what it could mean.

Mike Adams from Natural News also wrote:

Before the petition was frozen by the White House to prevent it from reaching 100,000 signatures, it was throttled to allow a maximum of 100 signatures per hour.

Dr. Rima Laibow of the Natural Solutions Foundation has been monitoring the petition’s numbers for several days. “Counsel Ralph Fucetola, JD, and I were tracking the number of signatures for the petition on our Skype chat and I noted something rather strange: there were many hours when the number increasing on the petition was exactly, EXACTLY, 100,” she told Natural News.

“We realized that although it is really important in this debate to get to the 100,000 signature threshold on this petition, the system was gamed, making it harder than it should be. We knew that if we did not reach that number, the White House juggernaught would claim that only a tiny fraction of Americans were against Mandatory Adult Vaccines and would use that against us.”

USA Today Survey Shows: People Want The Choice

Those that say they want forced vaccines say so because they would personally take them, which means that they had a choice to make that decision. But hardly any people want them to be mandatory. USA Today ran an opinion poll (also seen on Natural News) with the results being quite staggering. 92% of people surveyed said that vaccines should be a personal choice.

No Choice = Forced Vaccinations

So, where could all this be headed? Well, its pretty obvious it means that they could bring in FORCED vaccinations for ALL of us. That doesn’t just mean our children, that means for every single one of us adults too. How do you really feel about that?

Many adults are very much “behind” in their vaccines. They’ve not had any in years, nor as many in comparison to children today.

You might be dismayed to learn that there is a National Adult Immunization Plan in the pipeline to make adults have more vaccines – and they may be keeping an eye on how many you have.

Journalist Alicia Bayer wrote in her article U.S. Unveils comprehensive new adult vaccination plan:

“Think you’re up to date on your vaccinations? You might be surprised at how many vaccinations are now recommended for American adults — and the federal government plans to start tracking which of those vaccines you’re behind on.”

You can read her article in full here.

And if you haven’t had many or any vaccinations, imagine if they began to give you everything you’ve missed – all at once. Imagine if your child hasn’t had any either, and all of a sudden they give say, 20 vaccines in one single day.

You might think vaccines are a good idea, but would you really want to be given any number of them that you have absolutely no say in? And what would happen if you spoke up and said, “No I don’t want to have this amount, I want to do it like this,” but were told you had to do it their way?

Or what if they put you in jail, fined you, or worse, forced them upon you?  If you think this couldn’t happen – think again.

With people like Dr. Paul Offit saying a child can “safely have 10,000 vaccines at once,” then giving 20 at one time might not be seen as a big deal by some administering doctors.

It’s not unheard of for a child to receive 9 vaccines in one day, and sometimes even more are given. A mother recently told me her 6 month old was given 11 vaccines in one day – to catch up on all the ones he had missed. Sadly, her baby boy died a few days later.

This mothers baby received 11 vaccines in one day

Giving one vaccine can have a risk of adverse reactions and injury but giving multiple vaccines at once can make that risk much higher.

With all of this coverage about the petition freezing, chances are they will suddenly let it go again to gain a few more numbers, but I’d be willing to bet those signatures never quite make the 100k mark.

I am certain we could get 100k signatures alone just from Collective Evolution readers. We have millions of people visiting us each month from the USA and many are pro-vaccine choice.

What Can We Do?

Visit the petition yourself, sign it, and see that it’s true – you won’t see the signature number rise.

I’d also be sending as many emails/tweets as you can to the White House or even phone calls to your local congressmen. Contact your news stations and papers. Tell them what is happening. Chances are they probably won’t take the story up, but it’s always worth a try.

At the very least, show your friends on Facebook what is happening. Most reasonable people will agree, we should be able to have our choice.

Our freedom is very much at stake here. And without our freedom what do we have left?