Anti anti-vaccine, or why I get my kids vaccinated: Multitasking Moms and Dads

I don't get the anti-vaccine movement.

I cannot fathom why any parent would balk at protecting their kids from vicious diseases like measles and polio.

Yet anti-vaxers have enough power to get a loophole in a new state law that mandates vaccines for children in licensed childcare facilities. Parents can object "based on reasons of conscience or religious convictions."

Why object?

Parents may mistakenly believe vaccinations could cause autism -- a link that has been thoroughly debunked. Or, as explained by a nonprofit organization called the National Vaccine Information Center, they may be committed to "protecting bodily integrity and defending the inalienable right to self-determination."

Self-determination? Right. So are these parents also protesting government requirements to buy car insurance, buckle our seat belts, educate our kids?

Vaccines are safe and effective. Side effects are rare. 

Kids should be vaccinated not only to protect themselves from deadly diseases, but to protect other people - including adults with immune deficiencies and infants, who don't receive the MMR vaccine until age 1.

An estimated 66.8 percent of Ohio children age 19 to 35 months received the combined vaccine series including measles-mumps-rubella, according to the 2012 National Immunization Survey. The national average was 68.4 percent.

No one's arguing that shots are pleasant. I held my kids while they got stuck on their chubby little thighs, four times in a row, and did that big air-gulping thing before they screamed bloody murder. I hated seeing them hurt.

But the fleeting pain is necessary to protect them from potential, real harm.

You don't want to get a flu shot? Fine, no problem.

But for the big-deal diseases, mass immunization matters. Without it, we get measles outbreaks, like the one in Disneyland in December, which infected more than 150 people in 17 states, and the hundreds of mumps cases that started at Ohio State University last March.

These diseases are not nostalgic childhood rituals like chicken pox (which now too can be avoided with a vaccine). They can be life-threatening.

At least the outbreaks may put an end to opt-out clauses like the one Ohio just added. Lawmakers in at least 10 states are promoting legislation that would make exemptions far harder to obtain, Reuters reports.

Regardless, the issue keeps circling through media, as if there's a real debate.

Jimmy Kimmel, who has an infant daughter, last month created a montage of doctors urging (and cussing at) parents to get their kids vaccinated. He followed up with video satire of two community activists promoting a "child's right to choose" whether they want to be vaccinated. (Spoiler alert: 100 percent of children prefer lollipops to shots.)

Debating vaccines is as senseless as debating climate change, or evolution.

I'm with actress Kristen Bell, who spoke recently about having her daughters vaccinated. "It's a very simple logic: I believe in trusting doctors, not know-it-alls."