Readers answer our question about whether measles vaccinations should be required for all kids: Letters

Readers respond: Measles — Vaccinate all or allow for choice?

Don’t allow diseases to gain a foothold again

The only way vaccines work is to have 95 percent compliance within a populace. This level allows the 5 percent of the population who are too young for the vaccine or immune compromised (such as those undergoing bone marrow or chemo treatment) to be protected by the rest of us.

As an RN, I volunteer with Los Angeles County Public Health in their vaccine outreach clinics. I welcome parents’ questions about vaccines and always try to ease their concerns by steering them to the latest public health information. Still, I’m surprised by the misinformation some have about vaccine safety. Often this misinformation is fueled by blogs and websites with little to no medical backing.

I tell our clients that these diseases were deadly several generations back. Our parents and grandparents lost friends, family members and classmates to diseases like polio and measles. It’s only the push for full vaccination that has nearly eradicated what was once every parent’s fear.

Unlike many countries, we have the knowledge and the ability to control the return and spread of these deadly diseases. We owe it those who lost their lives to them. We can’t allow these diseases to gain a foothold here again.

— Lori Cruit, Santa Clarita

Here’s a win-win situation

Again, the tension between personal liberty and majoritarian democracy come to the forefront of U.S. politics and policy. The solution can be as simple as letting “anti-vaxxers,” for whatever reason, refrain from having their children vaccinated and enabling any public or private institution to refrain from allowing unvaccinated persons to assemble with their constituency. This way both can be responsible and secure within reason. We don’t need more laws to force one of the opposing perspectives to compromise their standards.

— J Peter Armerding, Oak Park

Based on junk science

Killing kids in the name of God or pseudoscience is just plain wrong. Allowing dangerous epidemics that could easily be eradicated by vaccinations is wrong.

A favorite argument of the uninformed is to produce some heartrending cases of kids whose health self-destructed after being vaccinated. Hey, I can produce a list of people who died a week after drinking milk. Does that prove that drinking milk is dangerous to your health? No.

All such facts must be studied in their proper statistical and scientific context. Truth is in the details, not the headlines. Scientists completed studies and now we have a scientific consensus that there is no problem. A scientific consensus easily trumps a few loose cannons.

— Dave E. Matson, Pasadena

Zero tolerance

How much tolerance should we have for parents who would knowingly expose their children and society at large to the spread of measles — a virus that is known to cause pneumonia and the risk of death, deafness from severe ear infections, swelling of the brain and brain damage, and cause pregnant women to deliver prematurely or underweight babies?

I say no tolerance. Parents or religious doctrines that advocate such negligent conduct are themselves a plague.

— Andy Garcia, Long Beach

Butt out of our lives

Seems like everything is being forced on Americans now. Butt out, government.

— Marge Peters Gianni, via Sun Facebook

More responses to this question were published Tuesday.