Anti-vaccine parents lacking trust in medicine

In a community known for embracing science and discovery, it is a seeming contradiction: Flagstaff has joined the scientific consensus behind human causes of global warming and the need to intervene with solar panels, electric vehicles and curbside recycling.

But it also has one of the lowest childhood immunization rates in the state, with some kindergarten classrooms falling below 50 percent.

What’s behind the apparent disconnect and how should it be addressed – if at all?

We are on record in this space as favoring vaccinations against those diseases deemed by public health officials as most threatening not only to children but the general population, especially the very old, the very young and those with compromised immune systems. The eradication of smallpox and polio is a tribute to modern medicine and effective public health campaigns, and we hope measles, mumps and rubella will soon follow.

But unlike some commentators, we have not been as strident when addressing. our local non-vaccinators – usually parents of young children who have sought waivers for personal reasons. For starters, they are numerous enough to likely be a friend, neighbor or someone we know, so why not just talk to them? And as several studies have shown, those who wish to persuade the outliers on this issue to come in from the cold won’t succeed through ridicule or scorn, which can have the opposite effect.

PERSONAL RESPONSIBILITY

Those studies have found that although the reasons for refusing vaccinations are varied (too many, too soon, too unsafe), they come down to two factors: A strong belief in taking personal responsibility for one’s health coupled with a distrust of modern medicine. The result, in some classrooms, is a loss of the so-called “herd immunity” that occurs when a vaccination rate falls below 90 percent, thus increasing the risk to those in the general community who are not (or cannot be) vaccinated.

In some ways, it is hard to blame modern parents for making those kinds of choices for their children. They have been told, on the one hand, that choosing a healthy lifestyle is even more important than choosing a doctor; on the other, they are told of incompetence and carelessness in hospitals to the point where American medicine is now one of this country’s least trusted institutions.

The growth of the Internet also plays a role in the growing health care choice movement. It has democratized access to specialized scientific sources but not necessarily to authenticated or even accurate medical information. The disease of the month often comes with its own range of quack cures, leaving citizens to wonder whether cellphones cause cancer, sunscreens protect against melanoma and hormone replacement therapy is good or bad – to name just a few. If modern medicine has already failed them, they say, why not turn to the Internet?

HOW FREE THE CHOICE?

Personal choice, of course, is grounded in an American credo of life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness. (Comparing that to the Canadian motto – peace, order and good government – might help explain why Canadian health care is organized so differently). But as Aristotle noted, one is responsible for acts only freely or voluntarily chosen. When a system does not provide sufficient or accurate, unbiased information, it can be argued that choosing a harmful health-related behavior like smoking or drinking alcohol is not entirely free.

There is also the consideration that, as John Stuart Mill noted, some lifestyle and personal health choices are not just “self-regarding” but “other-regarding” – they have social and, in the case of vaccination refusal, medical implications for the community. Accepting responsibility for one’s own health doesn’t mean doing it in social or moral isolation.

Sociologist Robert Bellah, in his pathbreaking “Habits of the Heart,” found this communitarian component at work even in those whose idea of what is good or right was lodged mainly in individual choice. When everyone who smokes is treated equally (say, with higher taxes or a ban on indoor public spaces), at least it preserves a private choice while respecting the choices of non-smokers, too.

BLENDED APPROACH

In the case of vaccines and herd immunity, however, there might not be much room for anti-vaccine personal choice. About 20 states (including Arizona) still preserve personal waivers, but some now propose having parents meet first with a health professional before they can apply. Others say the focus should be on making sure doctor-patient relationships are improved from the assembly-line model common to many high-volume family practices, but that requires a major overhaul to restore quality access to preventive care.

The way forward, say social scientists who have studied the problem, is a blended approach to public health that mixes personal with social responsibility in a health care environment that has respect for both. When everyone is participating in a system that gives them meaningful ways to improve their health, both personally and through organized medicine, it’s easier to get buy-in to a medical consensus on something as vital at mass inoculation but also susceptible to misinformation and manipulation.