Flu shots, should you bother?

The short answer is yes. Absolutely. Positively. As we know, there are skeptics out there and our current mismatch between those flu viruses covered by the vaccine and those circulating and making people sick have the flu-shot-weary climbing out of the woodwork. Of course, I couldn't leave you with the short answer, so please read on.

If our scientists had a crystal ball, the flu vaccine and the viruses circulating in the environment would line up just right. Since that crystal ball doesn't exist, we're dealing with a flu season that involves a nasty flu virus (A H3N2) that has put on a new outfit and is different than the viruses covered by the vaccine.

However, that doesn't mean that the vaccine won't protect you from the flu. It does mean that the vaccine's ability to protect you from the flu may be reduced, but if you're vaccinated and become ill you can expect a milder illness than the skeptic who skipped the vaccine. We know from the history on these changing flu viruses that in past flu seasons, even vaccines that were not perfectly matched to the circulating viruses offered some protection.

It isn't too late to get your flu shot, and with the holiday approaching you shouldn't delay. The flu vaccine is safe, does not cause the flu, and protects you and the ones you love. The most common side effects of the flu shot are very mild. If you've heard someone say, "I got the flu from the flu shot," then they've experienced a scientific miracle because it isn't possible. Those folks may have been exposed to the flu before getting vaccinated or before the vaccine had a chance to build immunity in their system. Or perhaps they were exposed to a flu virus not covered by the vaccine. Regardless, the flu shot cannot cause someone to get the flu.

So, back to the short answer. Yes. You should still get a flu shot if you haven't already and you should get one each and every year. Don't like needles? Healthy, non-pregnant people ages 2 through 49 years can get the nasal spray and skip the needle. However, the very minor pain of a flu shot is nothing compared to the suffering that can be caused by the flu.

For more information, visit www.cdc.gov/flu or call the Wood County Health Department at 715-421-8911.

Susan Kunferman is the director/health officer for the Wood County Health Department. She can be reached at 715-421-8911.