An epidemic of ignorance

Our opinion: A completely avoidable measles outbreak highlights the danger of easily obtained vaccination exemptions.

We’ll say what too many politicians worried about every single vote will not: The measles outbreak in 14 states is rooted in illogical, misinformed, scientifically baseless fears, held by a growing number of parents who are opting their children out of vaccines.

Science simply does not support the belief that vaccines cause such problems as autism.

What science does support is this: Vaccines are effective. According to the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, polio has been “eliminated from the United States thanks to widespread polio vaccination;” smallpox was eradicated in the 1970s due to “the vaccine and the way it was given;” and measles declined rapidly after an early 1990s resurgence “due primarily to intensive efforts to vaccinate preschool-aged children.” The CDC notes a “record low” of measles cases nationally in 2004, with just 37 cases reported.

Fast-forward a decade, and 102 people across 14 states in January alone had measles, mostly in an outbreak connected to Disneyland in California. It happens that California allows an easily-obtained “personal belief” exemption from vaccines and, in the county surrounding the amusement park, there is an affluent pocket of parents seeking such exemptions at a higher rate than the statewide average.

The outbreak has sparked a national debate fueled by those who liken vaccines and their producers to the tobacco industry, and suggest vaccination should be a “personal choice.”

To characterize this as an issue of freedom is at best a misjudgment, at worst a cynical pandering for votes by invoking our fundamental values. It is about health, and our shared responsibility as citizens.

Some personal choices must be weighed against their societal consequences: drinking and driving, second-hand smoke, vaccinations. The refusal to use vaccines affects more than an individual. Epidemiologists say 95 percent of children must be immunized to maintain “herd immunity,” which is defined as most members of a community being protected from a contagious disease because a “critical portion” of that community is immunized.

In New York, it’s not easy for parents to exempt their children from vaccines. Medical and religious exemptions are allowed, but both require supporting documentation, and school officials can bar unvaccinated students from attendance. Yet some state lawmakers want to make it easier by adding a “philosophical” exemption, which is available in 19 states. That’s entirely the wrong direction. The consequences of this legislation could be tragic.

What’s apparent is an epidemic of misinformation. In a national Harris Poll in 2013, 76 percent of respondents said vaccines and their potential risks need more research. Clearly, public awareness must be raised. Vaccines are effective. They save lives and reduce suffering.

For politicians, it’s time to think not about today’s votes, but about protecting all those little future voters.