The danger in the anti-vaccine movement

About three years ago, my sister-in-law shared the good news that she was pregnant with her first child — I was going to be Auntie Em! My partner and I celebrated the impending arrival of a new family member by immediately going to our doctor to get booster shots for whooping cough. The last thing either of us wanted was to even risk the possibility of being delivery vectors for a serious illness to our newborn niece.

It seemed like a no-brainer, frankly: Vaccines for things such as whooping cough, measles, mumps and polio have a long and well-researched track record of being incredibly effective. They've saved millions of lives and countless dollars in public health money.

And so it is utterly baffling to me to witness the emergence of the modern and seemingly rather large anti-vaccine movement, especially since the few sketchy studies purporting to show links between vaccines and things like autism have been so thoroughly debunked and renounced even by the scientists behind them.

I have many friends with small children enrolled in various day care centers and schools, and they are now terrified that kids who haven't been immunized likely are sharing their classrooms. Rightly so, too, as I recently learned that a disturbingly high number of parents in Wisconsin have applied for and gotten nonmedical exemptions for their children. They're astoundingly easy to obtain, since our state merely requires a parental signature — nothing from a medical professional — for the opt-out.

This is a travesty, not to mention an entirely avoidable public health disaster waiting to happen — or, as is the case with the recent outbreak at Disneyland, already happening.

It's not just kids who benefit from immunization. I have several friends who are immunocompromised due to disease or organ transplant and so they can't get vaccinated. They rely on the rest of society — something you'll hear referred to as "herd immunity"— to help ensure that they don't catch one of these highly contagious and often deadly diseases.

I suspect that this anti-vaccine movement is the product of both poor public health education and our remove from the days when it was quite common to have direct experience with these illnesses. Apparently it doesn't take long — about 50 years, by my count — for the collective consciousness to forget just how serious these threats were to our very survival as a society. But I know people who had polio as children, and I've seen the serious ill-effects it has on their life even now, as longtime survivors.

It shouldn't take seeing your child fall ill or even die to make you appreciate just how important getting them immunized is. And if you doubt, say, the measles vaccine's efficacy alone, get this: According to the World Health Organization, measles vaccination resulted in a 75% drop in measles deaths between 2000 and 2013 worldwide. That's huge.

Lest you think that it's no big deal that a few kids don't get vaccinated, let's go back to the concept of herd immunity. Put simply, if the vast majority of people in a given area are vaccinated against a disease — leaving only those with medical reasons preventing them from being vaccinated (newborns, immunocompromised adults) — even if one person does still come down with the disease, everyone else acts as a sort of firebreak to prevent it from spreading. The fewer people who are inoculated, though, the more and more likely it becomes that the disease will spread like wildfire through the population, putting the unvaccinated people at particular risk, but everyone else, too.

Wisconsin currently lags the nation when it comes to official policy on this issue. It is far too easy to obtain nonmedical exemptions for vaccination, and that needs to change. We also could use a comprehensive public health campaign to better inform people of the facts about vaccines and good hygiene in general. The investment we make in these efforts would be minuscule when compared to the cost of inaction.

The science is in. We have decades of research and experience to back up the fact that vaccines are, by and large, incredibly safe and effective ways of keeping more of us healthy and alive than ever before in human history. I don't know about you, but I think that's something worth celebrating — and continuing.