Vaccinations, a problem harder than it should be

Measles was declared eradicated in the U.S. in 2000, but now we are having annual outbreaks, the current one traced to a single tourist at Disney World. Vaccinations are the only practical means we have to stop the spread, and therein lies the controversy.

While there are communities with 100 percent of entering kindergartners immunized, that drops off the closer you get to California, both geographically and philosophically. Parents, many of them educated and economically comfortable, withhold their children from immunization and hope that other people's children will protect theirs. "Herd immunity," which reduces exposure to diseases, requires 95 percent immunized, and the country as a whole stands at 91 percent. Immunizations become a social obligation in a society that is losing interest in obligations — as witness the rise in red-light runners and hit-and-run accidents.

These parents aren't dumb, but they are scared — the "But what if they're right?" factor is very powerful when your chief concern is your own precious child. These parents never saw a child with measles, mumps, chickenpox, whooping cough or polio. They have only vague notions of the consequences of these formerly common diseases, and you can't blame them for that. They cautiously look to authority, but the CDC performed so badly with the Ebola virus problem that it lost a lot of credibility. That leaves Jenny McCarthy as a prominent source of information. "She advises against immunizations, you know, and she used to be on 'The View' or something."

Politicians, in particular those looking toward the presidential nominations, were quick to contribute to the confusion. Sen. Rand Paul, R-Ky., said that vaccinations should be mostly voluntary. He is an ophthalmologist and a politician, not likely to be reading general-interest medical journals, and who was obtuse enough to talk about smallpox vaccinations as an example of what some people legitimately might not want. Routine smallpox vaccinations ended in the USA in 1971; the virus was eradicated in the world by 1980, due to the immunization campaign, and Rand seems blissfully unaware. He backed off the next day, talking out of both sides of his mouth at the same time, as did Gov. Christie. They hoped voters will only remember the statements they agreed with, which is fairly likely.

I read a statement by a physician that immunizations have never been proven to save a single life. That's total and irresponsible nonsense, but it got his name in the papers. Everyone has his own motivations, not just politicians. Take me, for instance.

From the time smallpox vaccination was first proposed until today, there have always been people to claim whatever innovation was under consideration was actually a plot to harm others: Authorities in Africa tell people it was invented by white people to kill black people; immunizations cause impotence and infertility; measles vaccines, and others, cause "autism and other mental disorders," and should be voluntary. People desperately need reliable information.

Unfortunately, the swine flu vaccine in the 1970s really did cause harm. It was new and inadequately tested, but was used because public health officials believed we were heading for a 1918-like influenza pandemic, a worldwide disaster. They believed there was no time to wait, and it poisoned the well for public opinion in the future. In a society with little trust in the government in the first place, that's hard to overcome.

But we can depend on Sen. Paul for confusion and Jenny McCarthy for misinformation, so it's not like we have been abandoned altogether.

The surgeon general and I hope you will choose immunization for your family.

John Agnew is a retired physician who lives in Fort Myers. Send correspondence to johnagnew2978@gmail.com.