County urges HPV vaccines for kids to prevent cancer

Humboldt County Department of Health and Human Services, as part of January’s nationwide designation as Cervical Health Awareness Month, is encouraging parents to talk with their health care providers about the human papillomavirus (HPV) vaccine for their children.

“Vaccines are the safest and most effective way to protect yourself from serious disease,” Susan Wardrip, RN and immunization coordinator for Humboldt County Public Health Clinic Services. “We’d like everyone to be aware that this is a problem and to promote the use of vaccine to help be effective.”

DHHS is offering HPV vaccines at its Public Health clinic at 529 I St. in Eureka, and a nurse is available there to answer questions about the vaccine. According to a DHHS news release, the vaccination is offered by appointment only, on Mondays, Wednesdays, and Fridays from 8:30-11 a.m. and Tuesdays and Thursdays from 1:15-4 p.m. To make an appointment or to speak with a nurse, call 707-268-2108.

Unlike most cancers, the release states, cervical cancer is preventable, and when HPV vaccines are administered to both male and female preteens, chances of women acquiring the sexually transmitted disease are significantly decreased.

“Most cervical cancers are the result of becoming infected with HPV,” the release states. “HPV is the most common sexually transmitted infection in the United States. The disease often takes years, even decades to cause cervical cancer after a person gets infected.”

Wardrip said that HPV numbers aren’t reported locally, but each year nationally, about 17,500 women and 9,300 men are affected by cancers caused by HPV.

“Just like all other vaccines, the HPV vaccine must be given before possible exposure to the disease to be effective in preventing illness,” Wardrip said.

Clinical trials have shown that the vaccines provide close to 100 percent protection against precancers and for genital warts, according to the release, which goes on to state that since the vaccine was first recommended in 2006, there has been a 56 percent reduction in HPV infections among teen girls in the US.

Tia Baratelle, public affairs office for Planned Parenthood Northern California, agreed with the DHHS recommendation.

“We definitely encourage people to look into HPV vaccinations, especially under the age of 26,” she said. “It’s one way to protect yourself against cervical cancer, and I think education is getting better and the word is getting out. But there’s still more work to be done.”