In Our View: Immunize

Measles is a highly contagious disease that many younger physicians have never seen. It would have been nice if it had stayed that way.

Sometimes we pay a price for our freedoms, and we have to wonder if the price society is now paying for the freedom exercised by those who choose not to immunize their children is too high.

In Utah, vaccinations are not mandatory. They are strongly encouraged but no child will be prevented from going to school simply because they haven't been immunized. According to Utah law, parents can fill out a form where they declare they have a personal belief opposed to immunizations, or that the person "is a bona fide member of a specified, recognized religious organization whose teachings are contrary to immunizations." There is also a medical exemption for those with childhood diseases like leukemia or with compromised immune systems for whom vaccinations are not possible.

All of which leaves the potential to have a sizable portion of a school's population vulnerable to preventable diseases like measles.

It then takes just one sick student to start an outbreak.

The lives jeopardized by such an outbreak are not just those of the children whose parents chose not to vaccinate; they put every student in the school at risk. Admittedly, vaccines are not 100 percent effective, but when an entire community vaccinates, "herd immunity" prevents a disease like measles from being able to spread. When a significant number of the herd chooses not to participate, the entire group becomes vulnerable.

Without significant participation in immunizations, it takes very little to lose control of very preventable illnesses.

We saw a dramatic example of this when an outbreak of measles started at Disneyland.

There was a time where people believed vaccines were linked to autism and other developmental issues, but those fears have long since been debunked. Numerous studies have since proven that there is no link between autism and immunizations. Even Autism Speaks has since published its position in favor of immunizing children.

Vaccines are readily available and covered by most insurances and as such, there is no reason any parent should not vaccinate their child and follow through on getting the booster shots as recommended by physicians.

Those who insist on choosing not to vaccinate despite the clear risks to the rest of society and the overwhelming evidence of the efficacy and safety of immunizations should seek to find alternatives to public school for their children. Freedom of choice comes with a price. Perhaps only those exercising it should pay it.