CDC says 15 children have died from the flu

Nationally the CDC says 15 children have died from the flu this season. We typically see about 100 kids die from complications from the flu. So, it has to be taken seriously.

Local hospitals are seeing more cases. So, now is the time to do what you can to protect yourself and your family.

The flu has now hit the epidemic threshold, so chances are you or someone you know caught the virus this season.

At the Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Dr. Julia Sammons, Director of Infection Control, says their numbers are up.

"Particularly in the past week, we've seen a dramatic rise in the number of positive tests for influenza," Dr. Sammons said.

The flu hit my family as well. My brother-in-law Jason, who lives in Virginia, caught the nasty bug over the holidays.

He says, "It knocked me out for several days and hit me hard."

The flu typically comes on quickly, with fatigue, sore throat, body aches, cough, fever and chills.

Dr. Sammons says this year could be especially bad because the predominant strain going around is known to cause severe illness. And it has changed, so the vaccine doesn't protect against all cases.

But if you haven't gotten a flu shot yet, it is still recommended.

Dr. Sammons tells us, "The vaccine includes three to four different strains. And so during the course of the season we may see other strains predominate that the influenza vaccine could be protective against."

It's also vital to wash your hands frequently, disinfect common surfaces, and if you are sick stay away from others.

The flu can be contagious a day before symptoms and up to 5 to 7 days after your illness.

In some cases, Tamiflu can help, but it has to be given within the first 48 hours, and there have been spot shortages reported where demand is up because of local flu outbreaks.

If you or someone in your family gets sick, be on the lookout for severe symptoms, such as rapid breathing, shortness of breath and dehydration. These are signs to go to the emergency room.

Statement from Genentech:

We anticipate having ample supply of both Tamiflu (oseltamivir phosphate) formulations (oral suspension and 75mg capsules) for the 2014-15 flu season.

We have produced sufficient supply of all Tamiflu formulations for a severe flu season and are currently working with distributors and national retail pharmacies to provide consistent access to Tamiflu.

Flu activity is unpredictable and, as the manufacturer of Tamiflu, we do our best each season to anticipate flu spikes and work with our network of national distributors and pharmacies to provide Tamiflu to those areas of the country that need it most.

Despite robust supply nationally, from time-to-time, spot shortages may occur in local areas.

If Tamiflu Oral Suspension is unavailable at a local pharmacy, pharmacists may mix Tamiflu 75 mg capsules into an oral suspension (liquid) for those people who need it. The current healthcare provider instructions for dosing and compounding are found in the Tamiflu package, and also may be accessed at www.tamiflu.com.