Anti-Vaccination Book Teaches Children That Measles Are Marvelous

Although self-published in 2012, Stephanie Messenger’s anti-vaccination book, Melanie’s Marvelous Measles, has become relevant again due to the recent measles outbreak and controversy over vaccines. The anti-vaccination book teaches children that measles are “marvelous.” The Inquisitr has been covering the progression of the measles outbreak and controvery over vaccines.

Describing the measles as a positive experience, Messenger’s book follows the story of a vaccinated girl, Melanie, and her friend, Tina, who is not vaccinated and heroically portrayed to not fear contamination. The author develops the book with the extreme belief that there are benefits to catching the deadly disease and building a case against vaccines.

In recent days, the book has resurfaced in social media discussions as an example of extreme ignorance on the subject of vaccines.

Anti-vaccine book ‘Melanie’s Marvelous Measles’ stirs outrage online – Yahoo News – http://t.co/fo12X4yWOr

— San Diego BookReview (@SDBookReview) February 7, 2015

Messenger herself states, “Often today, we are being bombarded with messages from vested interests to fear all diseases in order for someone to sell some potion or vaccine, when, in fact, history shows that in industrialized countries, these diseases are quite benign and, according to natural health sources, beneficial to the body.”

Seeming to mock the title of vaccination proponent Roald Dahl, whose daughter died from the measles, Messenger’s book bears a title that is a play on words of Dahl’s George’s Marvelous Medicine. Dahl is also known for publishing a pro-immunization letter in the 1988, making him a target for people like Messenger.

Toting melon juice and carrot juice as natural treatments to build immunity, Messenger’s book has stirred some concerns on the internet. While many agree that certain vitamins and homeopathic supplements are helpful to the body, they are not scientifically proven to prevent deadly strains of a virus, like vaccines.

The argument about vaccines is a heated topic, bringing most people to agree that vaccines save lives, despite 20 U.S. states allowing personal belief exemptions. However, the extremist followers of the “anti-vaxx” movement cite various theories from their own homeopathic research. Even some medical doctors subscribe to the anti-vaccination movement, creating much alarm about consistency of treatment in the medical field.

Should doctors who oppose vaccines lose their licenses? http://t.co/iaTIOccqlo

— Forbes Tech News (@ForbesTech) February 7, 2015

Anti-vaccination research has been proven false or fabricated several times, especially with regards to Autism. Many members of the anti-vaxx movement are not informed of these updates as they passionately follow updated information that vaccines are bad. In Ontario, 20 percent of people believe vaccines are bad for them, despite the lack of any evidence to support that claim.

The anti-vaccination movement is an international community of parents and medical professionals. Recently, anti-vaccination advocate Dr. Sherri Tenpenny cancelled her speaking tour in Australia due to threats against her and her opinion about vaccines. In Australia, Messenger’s book was not well-received by the medical community.

Dr. Tenpenny elaborated on why she cancelled her tour.

“It’s difficult to grasp why pro-vaccine extremists are so adamantly against freedom of speech. They have taken it one step further. They have blocked the freedom to hear information that is not in line with their pro-vaccine message.”

The pro-vaccine message is founded on the fact that deadly diseases, like the measles, are close to being eradicated as a result of vaccines.

[Photo courtesy of Amazon]