Amy Mitchell Meza: Community needs deeper reporting on vaccinations

I would like to applaud the Sentinel for running two articles about vaccines in the Feb. 18 issue — one from Associated Press reporter Mike Stobbe, the other by Sentinel reporter Jondi Gumz. The contrast in vaccination rates among county schools quoted in Ms. Gumz’s article is almost unbelievable, ranging from 100 rates rates found in some South County schools, to rates as low as 27 percent in one area private school!

While I appreciate Ms. Gumz’ reporting in general I am disappointed she didn’t take the additional steps of challenging some common assumptions illustrated in Sunday’s article. For example:

The conception that drug companies “make billions of dollars” from vaccines: Actually, vaccine manufacture is surprisingly unprofitable for a number of reasons including the fact most vaccines are administered only between two to five or six times in one’s lifetime, so the profit margin after research and development is much lower with vaccines than for some other drugs. The manufacturing and distribution processes are also quite costly.

In the U.S. the number of companies manufacturing vaccines has gone from dozens in the 1950s to a handful today. The nonprofit American College of Preventive Medicine continually monitors and makes strategic recommendations regarding vaccine supply as it relates to public safety. If even one of the manufacturers currently supplying vaccines in the U.S. were to pull out of production because of marginal profitability or for some other reason, such as manufacturing difficulties, the public health safety net of crowd immunity would rapidly begin to crumble.

Why bring the suggestion from a blogger that “The anti-vaccine movement should be ridiculed” into the article? I don’t think this represents the position of many health professionals and vaccine proponents, and inserting it here only serves to provoke further division and to discourage real discourse.

Was county Schools Superintendent Michael Watkins’ position minimized in the article, or is saying that he simply has to accept of the opinion of the county health officer, Dr. Lisa Hernandez, (that the measles vaccine is not harmful) really the best he can muster? In light of the fact we are talking about area schools with abysmal vaccination rates, it would seem that school officials need to take a more informed and unequivocal leadership role in this conversation. My questions for Mr. Watkins and other school administrators are these: Are letters routinely sent by school districts to all families whose children attend schools with low documented vaccination rates? Are teachers and other school employees aware of the risks to themselves and their families? Do local districts monitor the vaccine status of employees?

Some childhood diseases like measles and chicken pox are airborne, which means one is not protected by hand-washing and other such precautions. A parent entering a school with an infant too young to be vaccinated may not even realize that infection could result without direct contact to a child who has already contracted one of these diseases. What’s worse is that often the most infectious period occurs in the days before the disease is likely to be diagnosed.

Ms. Gumz also quoted a local naturopathic doctor in the article, who was questioning whether “113 cases in a state as large as California is an epidemic.” Yet, as a reporter not only did she not present any contrasting statement from any other health professional, but also (astoundingly) ended the article on that note!

A quick Internet search reveals these 113 cases were not sprinkled lightly across time and the vast state of California. The number 113 (updated Friday, Feb. 13) only refers to cases that have emerged in California during the past two months, and so far (according to the California Department of Public Health) are limited to only 12 of California’s 58 counties. In fact, 80 of the 113 cases were found in four Southern California counties closest to the high-profile outbreak associated with Disneyland.

I hope the Sentinel will continue to offer a public forum for this important conversation, and that reporters will take the time to assure a well-rounded representation of facts and opinions.

Amy Mitchell Meza is a local registered nurse.