Immunizations have led to a healthier population

Recent issues of the Broadcaster have raised the issue of immunizations and current popular anti-vaccination trends. I’m not one to send frequent letters to the editor. I prefer to work away quietly, doing my best to optimize the health of patients, advocating for them in a sometimes complex health care system. It is my passion and I continue to feel inspired, humbled, and privileged.

Regarding immunizations, I am awestruck by the work of those who have come before me. Due to the efforts of Louis Pasteur, a bite by a known rabid animal can now consistently be cured. Small pox, a disease which led to the yearly death of millions, has been eradicated from the earth due a worldwide campaign of immunization. Polio, a condition which resulted in death or permanent disability in so many, is nearing eradication due to the brilliance of men such as Salk and Sabin, who developed vaccines against this condition. Tetanus is a serious condition, leading to a painful death or disability in many survivors. The muscle contractions of tetanus can literally fracture bones. Tetanus vaccine is well tolerated and has eliminated tetanus in those properly immunized. Since the causative organism is found throughout the environment, tetanus will continue to be a risk for the unimmunized. The genealogist reviewing census records sees many examples of families from the early 20th century whose children were all killed during a diphtheria outbreak. There are many other success stories including the eradication of congenital rubella syndrome and the virtual elimination of Hib bacteria meningitis, which was a common condition during the 1980s and earlier. For those in our community who speak against immunization, do you believe the above achievements are a conspiracy of medicine?

I am concerned that with our affluent and healthy society, we have lost touch with how fortunate we are to have healthy children. As grandparents we have an obligation to educate our children and grandchildren about what the world was like before vaccinations were available. Our country is swept up in an anti-intellectual frenzy, questioning the benefits of immunization, the reality of global warming, and the relevance of evolution, as expressed in this week’s National Geographic magazine. I believe that our chiropractic colleagues, while performing much good work, have lost their way on this issue and contribute to this misinformation campaign leading to a needlessly vulnerable population.