Ebola vaccine: Only government investment in private labs can achieve it

Had a licensed Ebola vaccine or therapeutic been available last year, the outbreak in West Africa would have unfolded very differently.

Health care workers and international volunteers could have been vaccinated and protected before treating sick patients. Those infected could have recovered at a higher rate with an effective treatment. Unfortunately, these products are not yet available.

Drug and vaccine development is costly, risky and time-consuming. In fact, a new study from the Tufts Center for the Study of Drug Development found that the cost of bringing a new drug to market has doubled in the past 11 years and now costs $2.5 billion. Yet there is no viable commercial market for products for neglected tropical diseases and potential bioterror threats, therefore there is no commercial means to recoup these development costs.

So, if governments want private companies to invest in developing drugs and vaccines for diseases such as Ebola, Marburg, smallpox and pandemic flu, they must take the risk out of that investment by providing development funding, demonstrating a government procurement market and providing clear regulatory pathways.

Fortunately, the U.S. government has put in place a system for the public and private sectors to work together on the development and stockpiling of drugs and vaccines for national security threats such as Ebola and smallpox.

Through partnerships with the National Institutes for Health, the Biomedical Advanced Research and Development Authority (BARDA) and the BioShield Special Reserve Fund, industry has pushed forward the development of more than 100 medical countermeasures that may otherwise have sat on a shelf. In fact, all of the Ebola drug and vaccine candidates in development have been supported by U.S. government investment.

The problem is that funding for these programs is inadequate and erratic, making it difficult to plan investments in the complex, risky and decadelong drug development process.

Bavarian Nordic, with operations in Denmark, Germany and here in Mountain View, is a biotech company that has successfully partnered with NIH and BARDA over the past decade to develop and supply a new smallpox vaccine for the government’s stockpile.

That vaccine is a platform technology that we are adapting to protect against other infectious diseases, including Ebola. In partnership with Janssen Pharmaceutical Companies of Johnson & Johnson, we have begun human clinical trials of a prime-boost Ebola vaccine regimen.

Furthermore, in our Mountain View facility, we are using a similar platform technology to develop cancer immunotherapies, in partnership with the NIH. That initial federal commitment to invest in a biodefense vaccine more than a decade ago is now yielding candidate products for other diseases of public health significance.

Thanks to champions such as U.S. Rep. Anna Eshoo, D-Palo Alto, federal investments in medical countermeasure development will produce more breakthroughs in the years to come.

Ebola is fading from the headlines, but the outbreak is far from over, and Congress should recognize the enormous effect a licensed vaccine or therapeutic drug could have. Now is the time to double down on what has worked — public-private partnerships through BARDA and the BioShield fund — by providing robust and sustained funding for advanced development, manufacturing and procurement of medical countermeasures for the range of biological threats.

As U.S. National Security Advisor Susan Rice said, “Today the danger is Ebola, tomorrow it could be another flu outbreak or a terrorist armed with a biological weapon.”

Paul Chaplin, Ph.D., is co-chairman of the Alliance for Biosecurity and president & CEO of Bavarian Nordic, a biotechnology company with research operations in Mountain View and Europe. He wrote this for this newspaper.