Pro-Life Groups say Merck is Partly to Blame for Measles Outbreaks

As the measles outbreak focuses attention on parents who object to vaccination, some pro-life groups argue one culprit contributing to the problem is actually Merck, which makes the only measles vaccine available in the U.S. And some have begun a new campaign this week to pressure the drug maker to alter the composition of its vaccine.

At issue is the MMR – or measles, mumps and rubella – combination vaccine sold by Merck. Pro-life groups say they object to the rubella component on religious grounds because it was made using cell lines derived from aborted fetuses. As a result, the groups say pro-life supporters have avoided the MMR vaccine ever since Merck ended production in 2009 of a dedicated measles vaccine.

“The current outbreak would not be as severe or widespread if parents had the ability to access separate vaccines,” says Debi Vinnedge, the director of Children of God for Life, a non-profit, pro-life organization. “Parents are being unfairly targeted as the problem when Merck is the problem. If they had the separate doses available more people would have been vaccinated.”

To what extent a separate measles vaccine might mitigate any recent outbreak or uptick in the disease is unclear. Children of God for Life and the American Life League, another pro-life group that this week has called for Merck to change its vaccine production, are uncertain of the number of supporters who would vaccinate their children if MMR was not offered only as a combined product.

Will Merck consider shifting its vaccine production strategy? We asked the drug maker for comment and will update you accordingly. [UPDATE: A Merck spokeswoman sends us this: "There is no medical reason to administer the measles, mumps and rubella antigens separately and the (CDC) guidelines do not support their use. Major religious groups have accepted use of the rubella vaccine because of the public health value it provides and because there is currently no alternative to prevent this potentially serious disease." And she notes that some religious organizations, such as the National Catholic Bioethics Center, support use of the vaccine.]

Both organizations, meanwhile, maintain that they do not oppose vaccines. “We don’t have a problem with vaccination, in and of itself. That’s not our mission,” says a spokesman for American Life League, which mails materials to up to 60,000 U.S. households. “The issue is that some people have an ethical concern receiving the rubella vaccine because of where it comes from.”

As The Wall Street Journal recently noted, large measles outbreaks in the U.S. have become more common in the past two years, even though measles has not been indigenous since 2000, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. At the same time, some parents remain concerned about a possible link between vaccines and autism, as well as overwhelming immune systems, prompting more to opt-out of vaccination.

Between 2001 and 2011, there were 63 outbreaks of measles in the U.S., but they were small, according to the CDC. But outbreaks can erupt when someone who has been infected in another country brings the disease to the U.S. and passes it to people in communities where many are unvaccinated. The spread is mitigated when people are protected by ‘herd immunity,’ which means 92% to 94% of a population is vaccinated or immune.