Cindy Lange-Kubick: The vaccination debate, and the risk of loving our babies, Feb. 8, 2015

This story originally ran on Feb. 8, 2015.

I was one of those parents, the mom who spied a suspicious red spot on her daughter’s back one morning and blinked.

And then said something like: Yes, you can wear the striped shirt with your polka dot leggings and your patent leather Sunday School shoes to school; just hurry your fanny up.

And thought: Oh, maybe I was seeing things.

Or maybe that was chickenpox.

Well, of course it was chickenpox.

Her baby brother already had them, and her bigger brother would get them -- and a few days later, the first-grader who’d trotted off to class contagious looked a lot like her polka dot leggings.

And I, of course, was a bad mom.

I feel bad all these years later, despite my rationalization that chickenpox was nothing much to fuss about -- and what about all that head lice floating around the halls of Merle Beattie Elementary? Now, those were the bad parents.

We are talking about communicable diseases again, and an outbreak of measles -- 14 states, including two cases in Nebraska -- and the parents who aren’t vaccinating their children against them, or against a host of other nasty things, in part because of a fear the shots lead to a rising rate of autism.

There’s a lot of hate directed at the Anti Vaxxers, as they’ve been christened, like anyone who questions immunizations is on par with Obama Birthers or 9/11 Doubters.

My kids got all their shots -- and that tiny swallow of anti-polio juju -- right on schedule.

But I can remember holding their feverish baby bodies, praying they wouldn’t be the one-in-a-million who ended up with brain damage.

Acceptable risk is all good and well when it’s a theory. It's harder when the baby in your arms is the flesh and bone your world revolves around.

And now there are more shots to worry over: IPV, RV, Hib. Unfamiliar acronyms for scary diseases.

You can worry, public health experts say, but get the shots.

Autism Speaks -- a leading advocacy group -- says the same thing.

So do doctors.

“Vaccines have been proven to be safe and effective, and they’ve done study after study after study,” said Lincoln pediatrician Alicia Cruce. “Obviously, the risk-benefit ratio supports them.”

Cruce has three children, fully immunized. She’s never seen a severe reaction to a vaccine in more than 11 years of practice. She’s never seen a single case of measles.

“And I hope I don’t,” she said.

Her dad had polio, and his generation saw children die of the crippling disease, and others. Whooping cough, measles, smallpox.

She wonders about the backlash.

“My generation has never seen these diseases," she said, "and maybe we’re not as afraid of them as we should be.”

Maybe. In the privileged West, we’ve eradicated the worst of the worst and are free to fret about picking the perfect preschool and weighing which jogging stroller rolls best on limestone.

Or maybe it’s Google. A validation for every theory, no matter how weak.

Or maybe it’s the ghost of thalidomide and asbestos and DDT and nicotine and mercury and everything that was once thought safe until tragedies proved otherwise.

Maybe it’s that the science keeps evolving. Maybe it’s MTV’s Jenny McCarthy having a louder Internet voice than the head of the Centers for Disease Control.

Cruce listens to the worries of her tiny patients’ parents. If they want to delay an immunization, she lets them, but she puts it on them to decide.

She supplies answers. She’ll tell them there’s more aluminum in breast milk or formula than there is in the vaccine vial.

The measles outbreak concerns her, and the rising numbers of cases of other preventable diseases.

“The sad thing about it now is we’re seeing kids pass away from these things," she said. "They’re not benign little illnesses.”

(In the developing world, 1.5 million children younger than 5 die every year from diseases preventable by vaccine, including 118,000 from measles.)

An adult with pertussis might cough for three months, the doctor said, but he or she would recover. “In a baby James’ age, it could kill him,” Cruce said

James is my 4-month-old grandson; Cruce is his doctor.

Three weeks ago, he had his second round of shots in her office. He was fussy that night, and he was feverish for two days, and his parents were worried and so was his grandma, who would prefer he lived in a world without risk.

But who also knows these things: Before the vaccine, 1,000 children died from measles every year in the United States. Before the vaccine, 9,000 a year died from whooping cough. Before the vaccine in 1963, a rubella outbreak killed 2,000 infants and caused thousands of miscarriages.

The chickenpox vaccine was introduced in 1995, when the polka dot girl was in middle school. The disease that once affected 4 million a year, and killed 100, has been nearly eradicated.

Count me grateful.