Measles vaccine proven safe

It was just a few years ago that measles was on the verge of being eradicated in North America.

‘Herd immunity’ strategies, where large portions of the population were immunized against the disease, had diminished its presence to the point where the U.S. Centers for Disease Control (CDC) seemed prepared to declare ultimate victory over measles just five years ago.

So it is a bit bizarre that there are currently18 confirmed cases in Ontario, 19 in Quebec and about 150 reported cases tied to an outbreak in California.

And more cases could be on the way.

On Monday, the province issued a warning after an infected person attended a youth event in Etobicoke, along with 1,000 other people.

In Ontario, parents are obliged to have their children vaccinated against measles at about 12 months and again before starting school. Some parents are opting out, for reasons that may have more to do with social paranoia and distrust, than solid medical evidence.

“The anti-vaccine movement is a very powerful movement; it tries to marshal its arguments and forces, and unfortunately, I think at times it is not giving the true picture,” says Orillia pediatrician Dr. Alan Hudak.

It’s important for parents to know any supposed links between vaccines (or the vaccine preservative Thimerosal) and autism have been dismissed by the CDC, as well as by the Institute of Medicine, which conducted reviews of the medical and scientific evidence.

Thimerosal, which contains a mercury compound, is not used in children’s vaccines in Canada, with the exception of an influenza vaccine. Canadian studies conducted since the 1940s show substances added to vaccines – adjuvants like aluminum hydroxide, aluminum salts or aluminum phosphate – are also safe.

However, Simcoe County’s vaccination rates are about 10-per-cent lower than the 95-per-cent ideal, Hudak notes. Declining vaccination rates mean the effectiveness of the ‘herd’ approach drops, raising the possibility of the spread of disease.

And measles is easily spread. The airborne virus can remain in the air for up to two hours and a carrier can be contagious for four days before and after symptoms (rash) show up.

The return of measles is a trend that can easily be reversed, but parents need to listen to doctors, not campaigning celebrities who lack the evidence to back up their claims.