Vaccination crisis leaves no room for pandering pols

Liberty is the happy outcome achieved when a people strike the right balance between individual choice and communal rules.

We may choose to drive to work at little cost to those who prefer to walk or ride a bicycle, but no reasonable person would argue that stopping for red lights should be optional for any commuter.

The reason is obvious: Those who ignore traffic signals endanger their law-abiding neighbors as well as themselves, and no community can afford that kind of liberty.

The so-called debate over mandatory vaccinations is not much more complicated than that. Vaccination rates above 90% have proven remarkably successful at immunizing every American from measles, mumps and a host of other dangerous illnesses. But when too many parents decide to opt out, that herd immunity is sacrificed. And those most endangered are the small minority of children with serious illnesses that render them ineligible for vaccination.

Presidential candidates and others in a position to influence public opinion should be as unequivocal about the wisdom of vaccinating healthy children as they are about the wisdom of stopping for red lights. In both instances, the benefits of universal compliance overwhelmingly outweigh any burden on individual liberty.

Instead, some politicians eager to curry favor with libertarians on the right and left are indulging the false (and arguably dangerous) notion that doctors have yet to establish that vaccinations are safe and effective for the vast majority of healthy children.

An epidemic of ignorance

While visiting a vaccine manufacturer in Cambridge, England on Monday, New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie annoyed his hosts and infuriated pediatricians worldwide by calling on policymakers to provide "some measure of choice" when deciding whether to require vaccinations for children.

Later the same day, Sen. Rand Paul, a Kentucky Republican who, like Christie, is jockeying for his party's presidential nomination, said in two U.S. television interviews that he thinks most vaccines should be voluntary, saying he knew of "many tragic cases of walking, talking, normal children who wound up with profound mental disorders after vaccines."

Paul, who is also an ophthalmologist, managed to violate the ethical guidelines of both his professions in disseminating this libertarian paranoia masquerading as science.

Both candidates later attempted to walk back their comments by acknowledging the public health benefits of vaccinating children. But their remarks were red meat for a small but persistent community of anti-vaccination activists that is lobbying for more liberal opt-out policies.

There's no federal law mandating vaccination against any disease, but the Centers for Disease Control says all 50 states require that children entering public schools be vaccinated against some or all of the following: mumps, measles, rubella, diphtheria, pertussis, tetanus and polio.

Every state exempts children for whom vaccinations pose genuine health risks, including those afflicted by leukemia or a variety of auto-immune diseases. (This is, incidentally, the population most at risk when vaccination rates in the healthy population fall below 90%.)

Many states, including Michigan, also permit parents to opt out on "philosophical" or "religious grounds."

Allegations without evidence

Why many parents remain convinced that medical opinion is closely divided over the risk/reward ratio for vaccinations is a mystery on par with the misconception that climatologists have yet to reach consensus on the existence of global warming.

Those warning about the peril of vaccination can largely be categorized either as charlatans like Andrew Wakefield, who lost his medical license after peers concluded he forged data that purported linked vaccinations to autism, or professional ignoramuses like TV host Jenny McCarthy, who never had any medical credentials in the first place.

The medical evidence that vaccination poses a serious health risk for large numbers of children isn't just shaky; it's virtually nonexistent. Politicians who suggest otherwise are suffering from toxic levels of either ignorance or cynicism.

That's not to say that most anti-vaccine activists are stupid or uneducated. In fact, many low-education states, including West Virginia and Mississippi, have relatively strict vaccination mandates, while others with a higher percentage of degree-holders maintain liberal opt-out policies. Resistance to vaccine mandates has flourished in both blue and red states where ideologues exalt personal freedom and parental prerogative above the welfare of the herd.

But those who have "philosophical differences" with evidence-based public health policy are entitled to no greater consideration than those who find red lights inconvenient and constraining. And politicians who muddle the issue with vague appeals to freedom and parental autonomy pose a public health threat of their own.