Free flu shots all across Shelby County Tuesday

SHELBY COUNTY, Tenn. — Shelby County Health Officials say turnout for free flu shot clinics is low. They hope Tuesday will see a bigger crowd as we prepare for the worst two months of flu season, January and February.

Dr. Helen Morrow told WREG, “It’s been really heavy in East and Middle Tennessee. Now we are starting to see it in West Tennessee.”

This year’s flu got an early start, and it isn’t showing any signs of letting up. Doctors tell WREG they don’t expect to run out of vaccines during Tuesday’s county-wide flu clinic, and encourage people to make time to stop by one of their locations all across Shelby County.

Deshaira Martin told WREG, “I usually get the flu vaccine, [but I haven’t this year] just due to my schedule.”

Martin isn’t the only one. Shelby County health officials say they’ve seen a lot less people coming in for their flu shots. Walk-in clinics at pharmacies like CVS and Walgreen’s are helping get some vaccinated, and they really want to make sure everyone is taking every step they can to stay healthy.

Martin explained how she stays healthy.

“Personal hygiene, washing hands. I have a child so I have to take very special precaution,” she said.

Several reports show this year’s flu vaccine isn’t as effective as last year’s, but Dr. Morrow says it’s better to be safe than sorry. A weak vaccine is better than missing a week of work because you didn’t come in and get your flu shot.

“It’s not quite as good of a batch, but that doesn’t mean you won’t get any protection from it, and there are three other strains in the vaccine,” she said.

All Shelby County Health Clinics are offering the shots for free from 8 a.m. to 4:30 p.m., but some locations are staying open until 6 p.m., so if you have to work late or you want to bring your kids after school, stop at one of these clinics.

Late locations include:

Millington Clinic
8225 Highway 51 N.

Immunization Clinic
814 Jefferson Ave., Room 216

Shelby Crossing Clinic
6170 Macon Road

Southland Mall Clinic
1215 Southland Mall

Collierville Clinic
167 Washington