Feldman: Doubts over vaccine safety persist

Resistance to vaccination continues.

Studies show that half of parents have concerns about the safety of vaccines, and 25 percent believe that vaccines cause autism. The doubts continue despite the fact that numerous studies in the mainstream medical literature have demonstrated that immunizations are safe and effective and have no connections to autism. The most recent study, published in the Journal of Pediatrics, involved more than 1,000 children. It found no relationship between vaccines and the risk of developing autism regardless of the number of immunizations given at one time or in total by age 2.

Our immunization rates have suffered, specifically in communities that, for various religious and philosophical reasons, are anti-vaccine. Even in some states, most notably California, immunization rates are so low that the "herd immunity" of the entire population is at risk for certain diseases. High immunization rates are required to maintain the collective protective effect of vaccines.

There is no better example of this problem than the current measles outbreak originating at Disneyland and now escalating to 141 cases in 17 states.

The scenario is typical: An unimmunized international visitor to the U.S. spreads the infection to other unvaccinated people at a specific location. They in turn spread the infection primarily to other unimmunized individuals, particularly if they return home to communities with inadequate immunization rates. Innocent people, some infants too young to be vaccinated, become at risk for serious illness and even death.

The public's fears regarding the measles vaccine were principally fueled years ago by completely fraudulent research linking the measles-mumps-rubella vaccine to autism. The infamous 1998 Lancet journal study was conducted by lead author Dr. Andrew Wakefield in London.

Wakefield betrayed the world, his profession, and devastated parents looking for a cause of their child's autism. Every sordid detail of the research hoax was documented in extensive investigative reports published in the British Medical Journal. Lancet eventually retracted Wakefield's paper in humiliation, and Wakefield was totally discredited and lost his British medical license.

Why did he write such trash? Greed. The investigations uncovered that Wakefield was funded by an attorney planning to use the study in a suit against MMR vaccine manufacturers. And during his research, Wakefield applied for patents for a diagnostic test to identify the fictional MMR-associated autistic syndrome.

The development of vaccines is among the greatest medical miracles of the 20th-century, changing the world forever. No longer do young healthy people commonly die of vaccine-preventable infectious diseases. A century ago, this was an unfortunate fact of everyday life.

The gravestones of people who died long ago bear the names and ages of young people who died of these diseases like measles, diphtheria, polio, tetanus, smallpox, and meningitis that are rare or non-existent today.

Most Americans, particularly young parents without memory of the devastating infectious diseases that once consumed our communities, may have little appreciation for vaccines and their importance to the common good. Misleading information in the media and on the Internet about the necessity and safety of immunizations has unfortunately diffused widely into the broad perception of the general public.

I often wonder if anti-vaccine parents would risk not immunizing their children if Ebola became rampant in the U.S and a vaccine was actually available. Would they vaccinate if polio returned to America? Of course, that situation is theoretically possible given outbreaks abroad and today's worldwide travel.

Vaccines have saved millions of lives over the past century. Unfortunately, some cannot appreciate what they do not see and as a result put their communities at risk.

Feldman, M.D., is director of medical education and family medicine residency at Franciscan St. Francis Health. Email him at richard.feldman@franciscanalliance.org.