HPV vaccines becoming a key part of sexual education on campuses

In the midst of anti-vaccination talks from all corners of the country, one vaccine has made headlines for making a more positive contribution.

Human papillomavirus (HPV) vaccines were previously thought to have increased dangerous sexual behavior such as promiscuity in young girls, but instead have been found to may do the opposite. According to a recent study from Laura Sadler, a research associate at the University of Manchester, getting the vaccine can actually help young girls have a safer sex life.

HPV vaccines are recommended for 11- to 12-year-old girls. The vaccine fights against nine strains of HPV, which can lead to cervical cancer.

“The study shows that amongst women in our study, who were mainly from the catch-up vaccine programme (older teens), vaccination was taken up by those demonstrating other types of preventive or less risky behaviours (sic),” Sadler said in an e-mail.

The news comes at a time during which the word “vaccine” can be polarizing. People against giving their children vaccines -- sometimes called “anti-vaxxers” – tend to cite religion reasons or health concerns as the reasons for their wariness.

But HPV vaccines, such as Gardisil, fall into a different category given that they don’t treat an infectious disease, such as meningitis.

Robert Bednarczyk, an assistant professor of public health at Emory University, says that he's not sure the study will ease naysayers’ minds, but nonetheless urges all parents to look at the untold benefits that occur when young girls get the vaccine.

RELATED: Flu virus mutation renders most vaccines ineffective

“I think it really just highlights the mounting evidence of the preventative measures vaccines provide,” Bednarczyk says. “When you do get vaccinated and engaged in the healthcare system, you get engaged in a counseling system as well.”

And it’s that counseling, University of Iowa senior Ada Vargas says, that needs to happen in schools across the country and at the collegiate level.

“It’s not something that is pre-planned, but when you’re trying to prevent cervical cancer [talking about safe sex] does come up,” Vargas says, an HPV vaccine recipient. “Sexual education in the United States is so un-uniform, that even a little bit of an impromptu preparation would be helpful."

Colleges have been making the changes that Vargas and so many others request. More schools, in addition to teaching students about alcohol safety, are also teaching students about consent and safe sex practices.

New York and California have rolled out specific policies and promotions to encourage students to abide by the consent rule “yes means yes.” Dartmouth University recently announced they will take a step even further, by requiring all undergraduate students to take a four-year sexual education program.

Some students have taken offense to these programs, arguing that they impart no new knowledge. The Dartmouth, the university's student newspaper, published an article explaining the program. Its comment section quickly filled with backlash.

"I wonder what the next step will be," one commenter wrote. "I mean, where do you go after four years? Perhaps full-time monitors for every student? Ivy League -- stick a fork in it."

But others, such as Vargas, say having early and frequent sexual education is key in decreasing sexual assaults and abusive relationships while increasing positive sexual behavior.

And the first step, she adds, is making sure girls get the HPV vaccine.

“I think if it's not required, then definitely recommend (getting the vaccine before college)," she says. "And perhaps moving forward it could be a requirement. You can go into the world and people don't know this information until late in high school or college. Learning it earlier would be much more effective."