Cleaveland: Measles should not be ignored

I contracted measles along with several of my second-grade classmates. I recall two weeks in a darkened room and a persistent earache along with my rash. One classmate almost died from measles-related pneumonia. Very few of us escaped measles, chicken pox, mumps and rubella in those pre-vaccine years.

Now the disease, which for decades has been easily prevented with a vaccination, is back in the news with 155 cases in 16 states since December, predominantly in children and young adults who had not been vaccinated. Several infants, too young to be vaccinated, also contracted the disease.

While measles isn't as deadly and frightening as Ebola, the last disease outbreak that hit the news, it's still a serious illness. Worldwide measles remains a problem with an estimated 20 million cases and 145,000 fatalities yearly.

Measles is a highly contagious, viral illness acquired by inhaling airborne virus shed by an infected person. The virus can remain suspended in air for hours.

Prior to the introduction of a vaccine in 1963, measles infected as many as 4 million American children yearly. Pneumonia was a serious complication. An average of 4,000 children each year suffered measles encephalitis, which might result in permanent neurological deficits. Between 400 and 500 children died annually from complications of measles.

The measles vaccine is based upon weakened viral particles. Initially a single injection was recommended at age 12 to 15 months. Because of concern that a single injection might be inadequate, a booster injection between 4 and 6 years has been advised for the past 25 years. Vaccines for measles, mumps and rubella are administered together (MMR).

Widespread vaccination programs steadily reduced the incidence of these diseases. Children with certain immune deficiency disorders or who receive chemotherapy for cancer should not receive the vaccine. Pregnant women and anyone allergic to components of the vaccine should not be injected.

In 2000, measles was declared no longer endemic in the U.S.; there were no longer any reservoirs of the disease within our nation. Ninety percent of eligible American children had been vaccinated. The hundred or so cases that were diagnosed each year were attributed to infected travelers who contracted the disease abroad.

In 1998, a highly publicized study in the medical journal Lancet suggested that the measles vaccine might be associated with a persistent intestinal infection which, in turn, led to autism in nine of 12 children who were evaluated. Lawsuits proliferated; an anti-vaccination movement gained traction. The potential costs of litigation threatened the manufacture of vaccines.

Despite multiple efforts, no other researchers could replicate the claims made in the 1998 publication. In February 2010, the Lancet retracted the earlier article, charging scientific misconduct, dishonesty and violation of research and clinical ethics by the principal author. By that time, 10 of the 13 coauthors of the paper had disassociated themselves from the research.

All U.S. states require vaccinations for measles and other common childhood illnesses for entry into public schools. Religious and personal exemptions are granted to varying degrees among the states. Some private schools do not mandate vaccinations. Because of parental concerns of vaccine safety, some school districts in Western states have seen vaccination rates slip into the 80 percent range. To achieve group immunity, at least 90 percent of eligible children need to be vaccinated.

Concerns over recommended vaccinations boil down to a tension between parental or personal choice and public good. An unvaccinated person places at risk infants and other children who haven't been vaccinated because they're too young, have immune system issues or cancer or other reasons for not receiving it. Recent, ill-informed comments by nationally prominent politicians have muddied public discussion of vaccine policy. Careful science should prevail over politics.

To inform choice, I recommend consulting the Centers for Disease Control website (www.cdu.gov/measles) for a thorough discussion of all aspects of measles, a serious, potentially dangerous yet preventable illness.

Contact Clif Cleaveland at cleaveland1000@comcast.net.