Mathis, Boychuk: RedBlueAmerica: Should Americans be required to get vaccinated?

Suddenly, the debate over vaccines has gone mainstream.

Amid a measles breakout — a disease that doctors believed had been eradicated a decade ago — a pair of Republican politicians came under fire for seemingly anti-vaccination comments. New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie said vaccinations should largely be left to parents, while Kentucky Sen. Rand Paul said he believed that vaccinations can lead to “mental disorders” in children.

The idea that vaccines cause autism has been debunked, but the declining vaccination rate is making the measles resurgence possible. What rules should Americans follow to protect public health? Joel Mathis and Ben Boychuk debate.

JOEL MATHIS

Here’s a proposal: Let’s treat unvaccinated people as we treat smokers. Smoking is still a legal choice in America — we don’t have it in our hearts to prohibit tobacco use entirely, for some reason — but it’s been almost completely driven from the public square thanks to a mixture of both culture and the law.

The same should happen to people who don’t have their measles shots.

They shouldn’t be allowed on planes. Or in classrooms. Or in grocery stores. Or in any of a thousand other places where the public gathers and can be exposed to somebody else’s misinformed decision to risk their lives to a deadly but easily defeated — with vaccinations! — infectious disease.

It worked with tobacco. The Centers for Disease Control reported this week that nonsmokers’ exposure to secondhand smoke dropped from 53 percent in 2000 to 25 percent in 2012. How’d it happen? During those dozen years, 700 towns and cities (as well as 26 states and Washington) have banned smoking in public places. It seemed a radical step at the time. Now it’s widely accepted as a legal act to protect public health.

Well, folks: The measles virus can do damage to a human body a lot more quickly than a couple of puffs of smoke.

If we’re not willing to permanently exile anti-vaxxers from the public square, we should at least make emergency provisions to do so. Anti-vaxxers should be made to understand that when there is a public health emergency — such as a measles outbreak — they'll be quarantined for the duration. They get to make their choices, but they don’t get to forfeit responsibility to the communities they live in.

It’s fitting the issue was raised by GOP presidential candidates. For 30 years, the GOP has been happy to subvert science — particularly regarding evolution and climate — when it proved incompatible or inconvenient. It turns out viruses are pretty inconvenient, too.

BEN BOYCHUK

This one should be easy. Vaccinations protect individuals and whole communities from debilitating or deadly diseases. People who refuse to vaccinate their kids for fear of them developing autism or suffering some other remote harm would put their children’s lives and the lives of other children in jeopardy — for a folly.

But it’s a free country, more or less. And it’s a divided country, as the coverage of presidential candidates trying to pander to everyone on the vaccination question certainly shows.

Would-be Republican presidential candidates find themselves in an impossible position. No political candidate can truly speak his mind anymore, if he ever could. A question as seemingly straightforward as whether parents should immunize their kids against preventable illnesses ends up being an clumsy exercise of “on-the-one-hand, and-on-the-other …”

At the same time, no Republican presidential candidate worthy of serious consideration would endorse the outlandish idea of jailing parents for refusing to vaccinate their kids, as a USA Today columnist argued last month. No Democrat would take that position, either. The idea should be offensive to Americans who at least profess to value individual liberty, regardless of party.

But what about mandatory vaccinations with penalties and consequences short of jail? That’s a policy debate worth having.

Mandatory vaccinations aren’t unheard of in the United States. Massachusetts in 1809 passed the nation’s first law requiring every citizen to be vaccinated for small pox. The U.S. Supreme Court upheld the law’s constitutionality in 1905.

What if instead of the government applying direct pressure on people to vaccinate, the law made life too inconvenient for people not to vaccinate?

For example, lawmakers could tweak public accommodation laws to let businesses discriminate on the basis of vaccination. Disneyland, where the current measles outbreak began in December, might require visitors to produce vaccination records as a condition of entry. Other businesses that attract large crowds might follow suit.

It would be inconvenient, of course. Anti-vax parents would howl with indignation. But personal choices often have broad consequences. And their indignation should not trump the public health.