Trial and error with the flu

The issue An illness that can be deadly for some

Where we stand Get a flu shot, wash your hands, cover your mouth and, above all, stay home when you're sick.

The Virginian-Pilot
© December 28, 2014

The routine of an annual vaccine is supposed to prevent the far nastier annual routine of influenza.

Except when it doesn't work.

That's the case in late 2014, when the flu virus appears to be spreading faster and far more furiously than usual. Norfolk, according to measures by WebMD, is the fifth-sickest city in America.

For any number of reasons, the flu is always bad news. The infection itself can be horrible, even deadly. Already, two young children in Eastern Virginia have died this fall.

Countless children and adults have been taken ill, some of them sick enough to require hospitalization.

This year, the vaccine designed in February missed the mark for the virus infecting us in December. Seventy percent of this winter's flu cases have been the result of infection with an H3N2 strain slightly different from the one in the vaccine.

The result is inconsistent immunity in vaccine recipients. Some folks have been entirely saved the indignities of an infection; others have suffered as completely as if they hadn't been inoculated at all.

The vaccine's ineffectiveness hurts more than just the millions who received a useless shot. It means there's a lot less protection in the population, the so-called "herd immunity" necessary to keep a virus like influenza from spreading.

The influenza virus mutates readily and has myriad forms. Scientists preparing the vaccine are always forecasting which strain will spread months later. An analysis of how this year's prediction and outbreak diverged should help improve next year's process. In the end, though, it's hard to predict the future with unerring accuracy.

The rest of us can do our part, and not just by washing our hands and covering our mouths and staying home when we're sick.

Vaccines are the best prevention available against any number of viruses, including the once-devastating diseases of childhood: polio, pertussis, measles. Compared with influenza, those viruses are relatively stable, and the vaccines well-targeted.

Despite this year's trials with the flu virus, decades of experience show that vaccines work. Even flu vaccines work - most years. And they all work better when everyone gets a shot.