Letter: Wrong-headed opinions on vaccines harm kids

It is frustrating hearing uneducated opinions from politicians about health issues as important as childhood vaccinations. Their statements have a huge impact on what voters do. What politicians say affects parents’ choices. Parents go into their doctor’s office and have a confused idea about what to do for their children because they hear mixed messages from government officials. This can lead parents to not vaccinate their children.

Science does not lie. Vaccinations save children’s lives. As a RN who sees how much preventative medicine, such as vaccines, impacts lives and health, I am pro-vaccination. All children who are medically able to receive vaccinations should get them.

According to Weinberg and Szilagyi (2010), “More than a dozen major infectious diseases (most notably, smallpox, poliomyelitis, rabies, diphtheria, tetanus, pertussis, Haemophilus influenzae type b disease, measles, mumps, and rubella) have been controlled in many parts of the world” since vaccines were developed. This is not coincidence.

Parents should not have the right to choose whether they want to protect their children in the best, evidence-based ways.

My generation has never had to deal much with preventable, communicable diseases. We have never witnessed loved ones fall ill to polio, be placed in an “iron lung” to be able to breathe, or die from polio. We have not had to live in fear of going out in public because we could catch smallpox. We have not had to deal with these situations because brilliant people and scientists in the past 200 years have figured out how to stop the spread of disease through vaccination.

From Edward Jenner’s use of cowpox to stop the spread of smallpox in 1796 to Jonas Salk helping to form a polio vaccine in the 1950s, vaccines have been proved to greatly reduce the incidence of disease and improve the lives of millions of people.

I live in a generation that takes this for granted. My generation thinks that science is lying or forcing them to do something against their will. They do not want to be forced to do anything, including protecting children in one of the simplest ways possible – vaccination.

Politicians do not have the right to discredit hundreds of years of science and research because they are trying to win an election or appease both sides of the aisle. A prime example is recent comments made by Gov. Chris Christie of New Jersey. Christie stated that he thinks parents should have a choice on whether to vaccinate their children, but he himself chose to vaccinate his four children.

Christie’s state has some of the most strict vaccination regulations in the country, including mandatory influenza vaccinations for children 6 months to 5 years when they will be attending day care and preschool. New Jersey is one of 30 states that do not allow parents to opt out of vaccinations due to philosophical or moral beliefs. Medical and religious exemptions are allowed, but only a simple form signed by parents stating one of these reasons is necessary.

What kind of message is Christie sending? He is not supporting his own Department of Health’s recommendations for vaccination. He is not supporting medical professionals and specialists that his state has in place to protect the public’s health.

This is happening in states across the country. We are setting ourselves up for a wake-up call. We need to protect children. We need to vaccinate our children.