There’s no debate that vaccines work

By Luther F. Cobb, M.D.

There has been endless debate around the importance and need for vaccination over the last several weeks, starting with a terrifying outbreak of a once-eradicated disease right here in California. As the President of the California Medical Association (CMA) representing over 40,000 members across the state, I’m here to tell you why we have to stop politicizing a public health issue.

The advent of vaccines that reliably prevent communicable illnesses was an important step in public health and has led to a host of other vaccines now available and recommended that have greatly decreased deaths and disease. In fact, the discovery and application of vaccines constitutes probably the greatest contribution to life expectancy in medical history.

For years, the rates of unvaccinated children have been slowly rising due to Internet rumor mongering and debunked “scientific” studies. However, we’re starting to see headway with legislation that passed recently in California; in 2014, for the first time in a decade, the number of parents who filed personal belief exemption forms to exempt their kindergartners from vaccinations has declined. Assembly Bill 2109, which was sponsored by CMA and authored by Sacramento pediatrician and California state Sen. Richard Pan, M.D., requires a parent or guardian seeking a personal belief exemption from school immunization to first obtain a document signed by a licensed health care practitioner. In the form, the practitioner is asked to attest that the parent or guardian has been informed of the benefits and risks of the immunization, as well as the health risks of the diseases that a child could contract if left unvaccinated.

Humboldt County coronavirus information graphic. ...
AB 2109 was born out of a rising concern around the increased personal belief exemptions in California and what that could mean for outbreaks of diseases like measles, mumps and pertussis. Exposure to these diseases not only puts individual children at risk, but the community as a whole, including infants too young to be immunized. Reduced numbers of personal belief exemption forms leads to decreased numbers of preventable outbreaks and it is imperative for the health of our state that we continue in this direction.

My parents saw the days of children in iron lungs and leg braces from the destructive effects of diseases like polio and I myself grew up in a day when the results of measles were seen regularly. Unfortunately, in these days of good public health, many of these memories have faded. Now that these illnesses are uncommon, we shouldn’t have to resurrect their awful impacts to remind people of the catastrophe, debilitation and in some cases, death that comes along with them.

Measles may be the current topic of discussion, but it shouldn’t’ stop there. Just a few years ago, California had some of the lowest pneumonia vaccination rates in the country. Bacterial pneumococcal infections are a leading cause of death for seniors who contract the flu because so many are not immunized against pneumonia. The fact is, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) recommends pneumococcal vaccines (http://www.cdc.gov/H1n1flu/HAN/111609.htm) for all people 65 years of age and older and for people 2 to 64 years of age with certain high-risk conditions.

And, just last year, the California Department of Public Health (CDPH) reported an increase in cases of pertussis (whooping cough). According to the state, a total of 10,831 cases were reported, with more than 800 new cases reported in April alone — the highest monthly count since the 2010 epidemic. Pertussis is especially dangerous to infants, yet it is preventable with proper immunization treatment.

This is especially important for rural communities like ours where many patients have to travel long distances to see their physician, which can lead to prolonged illness and greater risks.

This controversy will persist as long as these unnecessary epidemics occur and recur. The debate should end. Why do we need an outbreak of preventable diseases to remind us that vaccines are safe, effective and life saving?

Luther F. Cobb, M.D., is president of the California Medical Association, a past president of the Humboldt-Del Norte County Medical Society, and resides outside of Arcata.