Opinion: Tell lawmakers vaccines work

My colleagues and I at the University of Vermont Children's Hospital and the University of Vermont Medical Center are supportive of public policies that encourage Vermonters to get vaccinated. As a pediatric critical care physician, I have seen the devastating effects that vaccine-preventable illness has had on children and their families. My goals are to prevent childhood death, promote childhood health and well-being and to minimize pain and suffering when possible. Vaccines are the most important tool we have to accomplish these goals.

Vaccines work. We know this because we've eradicated smallpox worldwide. Polio, a once greatly feared illness has been eliminated from this country through vaccination. Diphtheria was a major cause of illness and death and it has all but disappeared from the U.S. after the vaccine was introduced. Cases of invasive bacterial infections like meningitis have been reduced dramatically thanks to vaccines. And vaccines that immunize against hepatitis B and HPV also prevent cancer. Next to clean water, no other intervention has had as great of an effect at reducing childhood death and improving the health of our population as have the widespread use of vaccines.

But vaccines only work if we use them. Measles was eliminated from the U.S. in 2000, but every year we're seeing more and more cases due to dropping vaccination rates. My colleagues and I who have worked in parts of the world where vaccines aren't easily accessible have seen some of the diseases that used to plague children in this country.

These diseases still exist and they're terrible. No child should become ill or die from an infection that we're able to prevent with vaccination. So we need to continue to be vigilant and protect our children from all infections, even those we tend not to see any more in this country.

Parents and pediatricians work together towards the same common goals. I encourage parents to talk to their doctors and ask questions about vaccines. Vermont parents should also visit the website oktoaskvt.org for more information about vaccines and to send in questions to be answered by local pediatricians.

We know that vaccines directly protect the child who is vaccinated. They are the most effective strategy to prevent life-threatening infection. Not only does vaccination directly benefit an individual child, it also confers an enormous public health benefit, reducing the burden of disease and indirectly benefiting those too young or otherwise unable to get vaccinated.

As pediatricians, we recommend that every child who is able to get vaccinated should, for their own health and for the health of the community.

Contact your state representative and senator and tell them to support legislation removing exemptions for vaccination.

Dr. Rebecca Bell, of Burlington, is a pediatric critical care physician at University of Vermont Children's Hospital.