Measles Outbreak 2015: Dr. Sears - don't panic, easy to treat

With the recent measles outbreak at Disneyland in California, the media has caused a panic among parents prompting them to take a closer look at their decisions regarding vaccinating their children.

However, Dr. Bob Sears, a well-known pediatrician, states that the media- hype over the measles is unnecessary. In fact, according to Dr. Sears, the measles is an easy illness to treat and nothing to worry about for the average healthy child.

Children who contract the measles will display a rash and have a fever for about three days and experience a little discomfort. Afterwards, they will enjoy the benefit of lifelong immunity. Unless the child is already sick with a serious disease such as cancer, suffers from malnutrition, or has a health issue that has weakened the immune system, he should have no problems handling the measles.

Dr. Bob Sears encourages parents to make sure they understand all the risks and benefits of the measles vaccine and all vaccines before getting their children vaccinated. He also recommends an alternative vaccine schedule to reduce the amount of vaccines, and the added toxins in the ingredients, that are injected into children's bloodstreams at one time. Dr. Sears is not convinced that vaccines are unrelated to the autism epidemic and other childhood health problems:

"I generally recommend that any child diagnosed with autism not receive any more vaccines. Now, this is a very bold statement, considering that the majority of current research does not support a link between vaccines and autism. However, research has not proven there is no link, because no study has ever compared the rate of autism in a large group of un-vaccinated children with the rate in a large vaccinated group. This type of placebo-controlled study is the gold standard of medical research."

Dr. Sears's position on vaccines has caused him to receive relentless criticism from fellow pediatricians in the medical establishment. He has been blamed for causing vaccination rates to decline. But he is determined to stand by the Hippocratic - "First Do No Harm."

Dr. Sears suggestion for a study comparing autism rates in vaccinated versus un-vaccinated children would be the best place to start in addressing a least one of the concerns that some pediatricians and parents have about vaccine safety. Likewise, there are concerns about the effectiveness of vaccines. Many children that are vaccinated against the measles, chicken pox and other conditions continue to contract these diseases and need booster shots. Whereas, children who get these illnesses naturally have life-long immunity.

As a parent, always make the decision that you believe is in the best interest of your child and allow other parents to do the same - there are no right or wrong answers. Even doctors cannot agree on the issues.