New measles case confirmed in Cook County

State health officials confirmed one more case of measles in suburban Cook County on Tuesday.

That brings the total number of confirmed measles cases in the state this year to 10, all from either suburban Cook County or Chicago.

Officials said the new case is associated with the KinderCare center in Palatine, to which eight other cases also are linked. The new case involves an infant, according to Melaney Arnold, spokeswoman for the Illinois Department of Public Health.

The eight other cases at KinderCare include two adults and seven infants, including one from Chicago, none of them vaccinated, according to city and county health officials.

The source of infection at the child care center has not been identified, and "the focus is largely on identifying exposures and conducting contact investigations to curb the spread of transmission," said Cook County Department of Public Health spokeswoman Amy Poore.

Meanwhile, the first case of the respiratory disease that was reported, in late January, involved an adult in suburban Cook County. That case is not connected to the outbreak at the day care, Poore said. And it's not clear, she said, whether the cases are linked to the multistate outbreak of measles associated with Disneyland in California.

More cases are still "possible," Poore said.

Measles is a respiratory disease that can cause severe health complications, including pneumonia, encephalitis and, in rare cases, death. The virus is transmitted by contact with an infected person through coughing or sneezing and can remain alive in the air and on surfaces for up to two hours.

Officials said the KinderCare children were all younger than 1 year old, meaning they were too young to get the vaccine that guards against measles, mumps and rubella. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, the American Academy of Pediatrics and the American Academy of Family Physicians all recommend that children get their first dose of the vaccine at 12 to 15 months and a second shot at 4 to 6 years.

The illness is contagious even before symptoms arise. With that in mind, the DuPage County Health Department released a list Tuesday of three locations that people confirmed to havemeasles visited, warning the public they may have been exposed. The locations include Advanced Pediatrics Neonatal Medicine in Bloomingdaleand Hand & Stone Massage and Facial Spaand Jewel-Osco, both in Carol Stream. No one in DuPage County has been diagnosed with measles, according to Health Department spokesman David Hass.

As health officials continue to investigate, state legislators have started advocating stronger mandates when it comes to vaccinations. This week, four state representatives filed a resolution calling for state health officials to put new rules in place when it comes to vaccinations at schools.

State law allows parents to object to required immunizations or exams on religious or medical grounds.

Rep. Michael Zalewski, D-Riverside, said he hopes the resolution, which may be discussed next week when the House is back in session, will encourage state officials to "tighten up (the) ways a person could opt out of a vaccination."

Zalewski, the father of a 9-month-old, said he plans to continue to work on legislation dealing with immunizations as well since a resolution is a nonbinding advisory motion.

"This is a very scary time if you're a parent of a young child to know that there might be something out of your control when it comes to the health of your child," Zalewski said.