Baby Steps: Vaccines a hot topic for parents

By Kristen Pind ~ Flourish
Tuesday, March 3, 2015

As a parent, we sometimes have to do things for our kids that we don't like to do. Timeouts, making them eat their vegetables and cutting down on screen time are just a few of those things. Some are for their mental and physical well-being, while others are for their safety.

A hot topic right now is vaccinations (especially the MMR vaccine) and their effects on children's mental and physical health. Since the measles outbreak at Disneyland in December, 17 states and the District of Columbia have all had at least one proven case of measles, with more than 125 total cases tracked by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Thankfully, Missouri is not one of those states, but it could have been, and that is a scary thought.

I am pro-vaccine. Yes, I have done research, and yes, both of my children have received all of the recommended vaccines at the recommended times. Felicity just received her MMR (measles, mumps and rubella) shot, and Cooper will get his second dose next year at age 5. My mother gave me all of the recommended vaccines as a child, and I am giving them to my children, too -- not because my doctor told me to, but because of the ease of mind I get knowing I have done all I can to protect them from a disease that has a high rate of death in children.

I know what the research says. I also know some parents prefer to disregard that research for more emotional thinking. For me, the fear of my child getting ill from measles -- a disease that was considered completely wiped out by 2000 and that had a mortality rate of 145,700 worldwide in 2013, according to the World Health Organization -- far exceeds any fear I have of the slim chance the vaccine may cause my child to get sick.

I am not judging, because part of being a parent is to make difficult decisions for the safety of your child. I am also asking you not to judge me because I, knowing you or your child had not had your recommended vaccinations, refused to let you hold my infant. My baby's immune system is not as strong as yours is. You could have given her a disease that she was not yet able to be protected from.

I also believe vaccinating your children is a choice, but to what extent? As one of my friends put it, if it's no longer a choice to wear a seat belt as it was in the past, should it still be a choice to send your child to public school without the recommended vaccines? Is your choice to not vaccinate your child more important than my child's right to not contract measles or polio?

Since the Disneyland outbreak, many states are looking to make opting out of vaccinations more difficult than just signing a piece of paper. I, for one, am glad our nation is looking at this as a real problem and not a freedom of expression issue. I have too many things to worry about with my children as it is -- I don't want to have to worry if the child swinging on the swing set next to my daughter could give her measles.

The take-home point is, parenting is difficult, and it just keeps getting more difficult. Make an educated decision in all things regarding your children, but especially on issues such as vaccines. Do research, discuss with your doctor and talk to parents who agree with you and who don't. All I ask is that we respect each other and make an educated decision for the next generation.

Kristen Pind, a native of small-town Gower, Mo., came to Southeast Missouri State University with big dreams of being the next Katie Couric or Diane Sawyer. She never thought that in her 20s, she'd be married with two kids and living in Cape Girardeau. Keep up with Kristen's adventures as a young mom who's still trying to figure out how her own life fits together. Turns out, she's living a dream she never knew she had, and loving every minute of it. Kristen invites moms of all types to find her "Baby Steps" page on Facebook.