The Measles, Vaccines, and Immunity 2015

The measles is a very contagious respiratory illness that spreads from person to person through the air. When someone is infected with the measles they can easily contaminate others by failing to cover their mouth and nose when coughing and sneezing. The measles is caused by a virus or viral infection.

What are the symptoms of the measles?

The first symptoms of the measles are generally a fever, runny nose and sore throat. At the onset, the measles could be mistaken for a cold. After a day or so, the main symptom of the measles, a skin rash, will begin to spread all over the body.

Should I be concerned about catching the measles?

There is no simple answer. It really depends on your overall health and the strength of your immune system. Most healthy people experience symptoms of the measles for about 3 days and recover without complications.

Will getting vaccinated for the measles protect me from the disease?

Measles vaccinations may offer some protection from the measles, but there are no guarantees. People who are vaccinated from the measles may need to have periodic booster shots to help maintain immunity. Unvaccinated people who contract the measles will develop life-long immunity.

The CDC and most mainstream medical doctors recommend getting the measles vaccine. A growing number of medical doctors and natural health advocates do not recommend the measles vaccine due to questionable ingredients. As with all medications and vaccines, it is important to know the risks and benefits, and to be fully aware of the ingredients, especially if you have known allergies or religious beliefs (aborted fetal material is used in some vaccines).

How can I stay healthy?

Remember that the most significant factors in the state of your health are diet, exercise, and lifestyle. It is impossible for any vaccine or drug to make an unhealthy body healthy. Taking good care of yourself by eating natural and organic foods, getting proper exercise and rest, and reducing stress is the best way to strengthen your immune system and improve your overall health. Doing so will lessen your need for ‘artificial’ immunity.