Meyer: Anti-vaxxers gave my kids whooping cough

The coughs kept getting worse, prolonged fits. And then the gasps for breath.

My 8-year-old daughter clearly had whooping cough. A doctor and a test confirmed it.

About a week later, my 5-year-old daughter started complaining about an itch in the back of her throat and started coughing.

How could this happen? My kids have had their shots, including the diphtheria, tetanus and pertussis, or DTaP, vaccines.

Von Miller (58) of the Denver ...

I blame the anti-vaccination movement for my kids’ seemingly ceaseless coughs.

About 15 percent to 20 percent of kids who get vaccinated for pertussis, or whooping cough, won’t be 100 percent immune. That is why the herd immunity concept becomes important. If more kids get vaccinated, there is a reduced chance the illness will spread to vulnerable populations.

Pertussis is “the 100-day cough” because it goes on and on. Antibiotics have stopped its spread, but my daughters’ faces continue to turn red as they hack and hack through the night.

A recent measles outbreak from an exposure at Disneyland sparked a national debate about vaccinations. Measles, like pertussis, can be controlled through vaccinations, but it requires herd immunity.

Colorado has not kept up.

The state’s kindergartners have the country’s worst reported vaccination rate, according to the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Our pertussis prevention is abysmal. Fewer than 80.9 percent of Colorado kindergartners had DTaP vaccinations for the 2013-14 school year, compared to the national 95 percent median rate.

Between 2011 and 2012, the number of pertussis cases in Colorado increased by 258.5 percent, from 8.2 to 29.4 cases per 100,000 population. In 2013, there were 1,458 confirmed cases, and last year 1,246 cases.

Boulder County historically has high numbers of pertussis cases. It also has many under-immunized children and personal exemptions to immunizations.

In Boulder Valley schools, where my kids attend, the vaccination rate, including opt-outs, is a paltry 82 percent.

At least 92 percent should be immunized for herd immunity to be successful, experts say.

Nevertheless, in Boulder — one of the most highly educated counties in the country — parents willfully ignore science and public health concerns by opting out on something so important.

Some argue pertussis vaccines are ineffective, that they wear off, that the vaccine is unsafe and the risks outweigh the benefits.

Yet in 2013, only three hospitalized cases in Colorado were associated with adverse vaccine reactions, compared to 538 hospitalizations for potentially vaccine-preventable diseases. That added up to a health care cost of $29 million.

While the vast majority of kids with pertussis simply cough for months, the bacterial infection can be fatal and kills 200,000 children worldwide every year.

Additionally, the illness is blamed for millions of dollars in lost productivity due to time away from school and work and in health care expenses.

By shunning the vaccine, people perpetuate a public health menace, said Dr. Larry Wolk, director of the Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment.

“You don’t want to be the one who spreads that to someone who is immune-compromised who it will kill,” Wolk said.

For the next several weeks, my daughters’ seemingly endless coughing fits will provide a regular reminder of the importance of vaccines.

E-mail Jeremy Meyer at jpmeyer@ denverpost.com. Follow him on Twitter: @JPMeyerDPost

To send a letter to the editor about this article, submit online or check out our guidelines for how to submit by e-mail or mail.