Whalen: Vaccination is safe, necessary for public health

One of the challenges I face as a scientist is how to best convey the findings of my research, or the research of others, to an audience outside of my field. Yet, complex discoveries often inform public health and health policy. Scientists often engage with the community to explain research findings to a broad and critical audience of policymakers, journalists and laypeople. However, there is often a wide communication gap between the sphere of scientists and that of the public. Nowhere is this gap more evident than the ongoing discussion surrounding vaccination in the United States. The alarming rise in measles cases, including the outbreak of more than 140 cases associated with Disneyland, has brought this public health problem into clear focus.

Measles was eliminated from the United States in 2000, but elimination does not mean it is gone forever. In recent years, the number of measles cases has trended upward, as vaccination levels have fallen in some parts of the country. This is troubling for several reasons.

From a public health perspective, high vaccination levels are necessary because they create population immunity, sometimes called “herd” immunity. Diseases like measles are highly contagious, with one sick individual often infecting up to 12 additional people. To achieve population immunity against measles, we need to vaccinate more than 90 percent of the population. If this population immunity wanes because people decide not to vaccinate themselves or their children, then the outcome is predictable: measles will re-emerge and spread.

Measles is not a benign disease. Because measles outbreaks have been few and far between during the past 25 years, many have forgotten how dangerous the disease truly is. Measles may be accompanied by serious consequences such as pneumonia, brain damage and death. In rare cases, it may cause a life-threatening neurologic condition that develops later in life.

There also are economic ramifications from measles outbreaks. From the high cost of providing care to someone infected with measles to the lost wages and productivity stemming from workplace absences, the economic consequences can be far-reaching and affect individuals and communities alike.

What might be most troubling, however, is the misinformation about vaccine safety. With some prominent celebrities leading the way, pseudo-science and poorly sourced information have had a disproportional impact on the national dialogue. This misinformation has led some to decide to forego vaccinations for their children.

For instance, there is a myth that the measles vaccine causes autism. The cause, or causes, of autism are not known, but multiple studies have proven the measles vaccine is not associated with autism, and therefore cannot cause it.

This leads us back to the communication challenge that sparked the need for this column. The lack of vaccination in some sectors of the population shows what happens when accurate and clear messages about vaccines are either misunderstood or go unheeded. Instead of processing the message, the public is left to navigate through a confusing cloud of misinformation.

This is, in part, the fault of the scientific community. Scientists are often unwilling, or unable, to share their research findings with the public in a way that is accessible without diminishing the science. But there is another reason - they may fear what they share will be misunderstood.

With that in mind, let me make my attempt to be clear, concise and accurate. Childhood vaccinations are safe. They protect the individual child from infection and can help protect children who cannot be vaccinated because of medical reasons. They do not produce long-term, severe side effects.

Vaccines are a central strategy in the control of infectious diseases in the United States. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention has found that vaccines were the single most important public health achievement in the 20th century. But this remarkable achievement may be reversed in the 21st century unless we maintain high levels of appropriate vaccination.

More than anything, dialogue is important - between scientists, doctors, families and advocates. If you have questions or concerns about measles and its vaccine, seek advice from knowledgeable practitioners whom you trust. Your family doctor or local public health district office will likely have the answers you seek about the safety and usefulness of vaccines.

Dr. Christopher Whalen is a professor of infectious disease epidemiology in the University of Georgia College of Public Health.