Mercury News editorial: California should end personal belief vaccine exemption

State Sen. Richard Pan believes a child should not have to die for California to tough its vaccination laws.

The Sacramento Democrat is a pediatrician who was the former director of the UC-Davis Pediatric Residency Program. For years he's been warning that the state's lax immunization laws leave California vulnerable to contagious diseases, and he's right. With the first measles case reported in Contra Costa County Wednesday and the possibility that BART riders have been exposed, the peril hits home in the Bay Area.

It's time to change the law. Parents should not be able to opt out of vaccinations under a "personal belief" exemption, as they can now, and it may be necessary to eliminate the religious exemption, too. The tougher state laws are, the higher vaccination rates go.

Measles was all but eliminated in the United States until the past decade, when parents began resisting immunization despite overwhelming scientific evidence. The disease is still life-threatening; about 25 percent of the more than 120 victims so far have been hospitalized.

The Centers for Disease Control has a goal of immunizing at least 90 percent of all children before they enter kindergarten. Clusters of unvaccinated kids create a pool in which disease can spread, threatening those who can't be vaccinated for various reasons as well as the small minority for whom vaccine does not work.

The national average immunization rate is 91.1 percent. California's rate hovers just above the 90 percent rate. But California had a nearly 70 percent increase in exemptions from 2009-2013, leaving the state vulnerable to this outbreak.

California is one of only 20 states to permit a personal belief exemption for philosophical reasons, and 80 percent of parents who decline vaccines for their kids use this excuse. Today more than 10,000 kindergarten students have waivers due to parents' personal beliefs. Another 2,760 California parents sought religious exemptions for their kindergarteners.

Pan is teaming with Sen. Ben Allen, D-Santa Monica, on a bill to increase vaccination rates. Eliminating the personal belief exemption is essential. The Legislature should discuss ending the religious exemption as well, although all but two states -- West Virginia and Mississippi -- still allow it. The danger is that parents now using "personal belief" might suddenly claim they've gotten religion.

A spokesman for Brown told the Los Angeles Times last week that the governor is open to a bill that eliminates all exemptions except for medical reasons, although he has supported the religious exemption in the past. So it's up to Pan and Allen to sell the tightest possible regulation. Santa Clara County has an immunization rate of 92.53 percent, and Contra Costa County's is 93.96 percent. But families cross county borders all the time, and Santa Cruz (84.38 percent) and Alameda (88.94 percent) have troubling levels. Remember Disneyland, and support strong legislation.