Heartbroken father Richard Mills pleads with Government over lifesaving vaccine for meningitis type B after losing son Harry

Heartbroken parents who lost their 11-year-old son to meningitis are calling on the Government to end the delay over introducing a vaccine to prevent future tragedies.

Richard and Judi Mills from Marlow are spearheading a high profile campaign with a leading charity, after Harry’s death in 2007 from meningococcal Group B (MenB) brought their world crashing down.

The popular former Spinfield School pupil and avid sportsman’s sudden death has spurred his devastated family on to generate over £120,000 in his memory through a series of sporting events and fundraisers.

Mr and Mrs Mills, of Institute Road, say funding for a long overdue jab - approved for use over a year ago - needs to be found now after plans to roll it out nationwide stalled.

And the determined parents want to stop other families going through the heartache of losing a child, and repay the faith of Marlovians who have given so generously to Harry’s cause.

Mr Mills said: "The issue is conversations between the Government and the people that produce the vaccine.

"There are people getting this disease that shouldn’t be getting it. The big concern is there are 200 to 300 people that die each year from it and an awful lot are left with loss of limbs and infection.

"The cost is the last issue and the vaccine is there.

"A lot of people in Marlow have given a lot to raise this money and I feel an obligation to them, to all the parents out there and their future children.

"Anybody that has contracted Meningitis since then, we think it shouldn’t have happened. The pain it causes it horrendous and if it can be stopped it should."

Sports mad Harry, an avid rugby fan who played for Marlow under 12s, was healthy and happy until contracting the disease, which took his life in less than a day.

A vaccine for the type-B strain was approved by the Joint Committee for Vaccination and Immunisation (JCVI) on March 21 last year, to be routinely given to children in the UK.

And the Mills family are now teaming up with the Meningitis Research Foundation (MRF) to launch the #wheresourvaccine campaign, which aims to put pressure on MPs.

Chris Head, MRF chief executive, said: "We appreciate that the JCVI stated that the vaccine recommendation was subject to a cost-effective price being agreed between the vaccine manufacturer and the Department of Health, but these price negotiations have been ongoing since July 2014 and have stalled.

"We also realise there are many pressures on NHS budgets but this Government claims to want people to be fit for life throughout their life. Surely the answer is to protect future generations by vaccinating to prevent disease?

"We will not stop until every child is protected from this disease."

MRF estimates that there are around 3,200 cases of meningitis and septicaemia every year in the UK.

As many as one in ten of those affected will die and a third of survivors will be left with after-effects, some as serious as brain damage, amputations, blindness and hearing loss.

The Department of Health insists it is committed to introducing the vaccine, but says it is yet to strike a deal with manufacturers Novartis.

A spokesperson said:"We are very clear that we want to see this vaccine introduced as soon as possible to help protect children from this devastating disease.

"The JCVI recommended that a MenB vaccine be introduced, but only at a cost-effective price - below the price published by Novartis. We need to make sure NHS funds are used effectively and negotiations are continuing."