Parents: please, vaccinate your kids

I remember chicken pox. I remember how painfully itchy it was and how I sobbed and begged my mom to make it go away.

I was little, in first grade, if I remember correctly. I missed a week or so of school. It was horrible. The little itchy scabs left little scars on my body that faded over time.

I never had the measles. My folks vaccinated me right away, both of them having far too much experience themselves with diseases. If there had been a chicken pox vaccine when I was a child, I would have gotten it.

My parents loved me far too much to have allowed me to suffer needlessly from any disease if there was a vaccine available.

They were aware of the risks. A tiny percentage of people who get vaccines get sick from the vaccines. That’s how it is with all medicine.

But both of them had first-hand experience with many of the diseases the vaccines were preventing. With that knowledge there was no question that the tiny risk from the vaccine was better than the risk of getting the disease.

Thanks to my parents and others of my parents’ generation, people under the age of 50 have very little experience with those horrible childhood illnesses.

Most of us have no memories of the horrible rashes, the incredibly painful mumps or the coughs that go on until you are literally dying because you cannot breathe.

Unfortunately, that has led a lot of my generation and younger to stop believing that vaccines are necessary. And that, in turn, has brought back some of those horrible diseases.

I had a woman my age tell me that no one had ever died from measles. She’s wrong. In 2013 the World Health Organization says 145,700 people died worldwide from measles. Most of the victims were children under the age of five.

That startling ignorance of those diseases has led to the current measles outbreak. The mortality rate of measles is low, but some of the victims will likely die from the disease or later complications.

An outbreak of mumps has also hit Idaho. I wonder what the victims of that outbreak would pick given a choice between a poke in the arm or the full-blown disease.

Whooping cough outbreaks also occur with some regularity. Many babies have died when they contracted the disease, painfully coughing themselves to death, while their parents watched helplessly.

Sadly, it will take another generation of parents with first-hand experience of preventable childhood diseases to bring back the vaccination rates that nearly eliminated those diseases from this country.

In the meantime, I’m not looking forward to attending the funerals of innocent children with foolish parents.