Not too late to get vaccinated

FMH has seen increase in flu this season, Clark Memorial has not

NEW ALBANY — Indiana is one of 36 states where influenza is widespread according to the Centers for Disease Control.

The Associated Press reported last week that five people over the age of 65 have died from the flu in Indiana so far this season, and the season has yet to hit its peak.

Floyd Memorial Hospital and Health Services has also seen an increase in people coming to the emergency room with flu-like symptoms.

“We have seen widespread activity.” said Dr. Tom Harris, emergency room doctor at FMH. “The CDC has called it an epidemic and that goes along with what we have seen.”

In November and December, FMH administered 615 influenza screenings with 50 percent of those tests coming back positive, which is compared to only 485 screenings in 2013.

While there have been some reports about the effectiveness of this year’s vaccine, Harris, who is also the Floyd County health officer, said it’s important for people to get vaccinated. However, he said many choose not to get the shot and that obviously puts them at a higher risk of being infected.

“There has been some question about how accurate the vaccine has been this year,” Harris said. “It’s been about 60 percent accurate. The shot can also lesson the severity of the flu. There are just a lot of people who don’t get the shot.”

While Floyd County has seen an increase in the flu and screenings, Clark Memorial Hospital has not.

In November 2013, Clark Memorial confirmed 12 cases of the flu compared to only four in 2014 during that same period. There was one more case of the flu in December in the hospital’s emergency room then there was in 2013.

But Clark Memorial has administered more influenza screenings this season. In November and December, the ER performed 862 tests compared to 715 over that same period in 2013.

“A lot of people have the common cold or something else and think they have the flu, so we have seen an increase in testing,” said Bryan Boone, RN, director of emergency services at Clark Memorial. “We are putting masks on people who come to the ER who think they have the flu.”

Boone said people just need to use common sense — get vaccinated, wash their hands regularly, and if they do get sick, stay away from people — through the rest of the flu season.

“We have posted signs for people to take precaution. Many people here [patients] are at risk and it can further their complications if they are around people who are sick,” he said. “We are encouraging people not to visit loved ones if they feel sick. It can just make the situation worse.”

Several Indiana hospitals have restricted visitors to try to protect patients and staff from the flu virus, the Associated Press reported recently.

Harris said it takes about two weeks after receiving the flu shot for the body to build up antibodies. He said it is definitely not too late to be vaccinated since the season will run at least two to three more months. Harris said while it is important for the elderly and women who are pregnant to be vaccinated, he said everyone should get the shot since they are affordable and may keep you from getting sick.

“You have got to be careful with the flu. There are 20,000 deaths in the U.S. associated with it each year,” he said. “That is half of a football stadium. Most of the people who die do have underlying medical problems.”

Harris also said if you do have the flu, you need to be fever-free for two days, without the assistance of medicine, before going back to work or out in the public.

Flu activity most commonly peaks in the U.S. between December and February, according to the CDC website. However, seasonal flu activity can begin as early as October and continue to occur as late as May. The CDC also recommends a yearly flu vaccine for everyone 6 months of age and older. While there are many different flu viruses, the seasonal flu vaccine is designed to protect against the main flu viruses that research suggests will cause the most illness during the flu season, the CDC reports.

At Greater Clark County Schools, health officials have kept a close eye on the number of students with reported flu diagnoses, but haven’t seen much to raise their concerns.

Teresa Stingel, health services coordinator for the district, said they’ve had a couple of schools come up to about 15 percent of their students diagnosed with the flu, but that falls below the state health department’s guideline of 20 percent for reporting.

“We put posters out about hand washing and how to prevent the spread of germs and everything,” Stingel said. “We just told them to get that information out to the teachers and students if it hadn’t already just to lower that risk. We’ll just continue to look at absentee reports and tell our staff to alert with any increases that come out.”

— Staff writer Jerod Clapp contributed to this report.