Flu vaccine paradox spreading globally as more vaccinated people catch the flu

(NaturalNews) The conventional medical system is literally grasping at straws trying to maintain the illusion that vaccines work, with new reports now admitting that flu vaccines are an utter failure while still pushing people to get them. The latest nonsensical narrative, at least from the Canadian government, attributes all the inconsistencies between what authorities have long claimed about the alleged efficacy of the flu shot and its actual dismal success rate to a mysterious "paradox" where previous vaccinations somehow interfere with current ones.

Since health authorities no longer have a leg to stand on -- it is now widespread knowledge that the flu shot is minimally effective at best -- they are resorting to more confusing pseudoscience that, oddly enough, actually affirms what flu shot skeptics have surmised for many years. Vaccines in general, they now reluctantly admit, affect every person differently. And depending on what previous vaccinations a person has had, flu shots may or may not provide any protection at all--and in some cases, they will make a person more prone to illness.

"People who receive flu vaccines year after year can sometimes show reduced protection, an effect that Canadian infectious disease specialists say muddies public health messages for annual flu vaccine campaigns," explains Canada's CBC News about this disturbing phenomenon.

"During the 2009 H1N1 pandemic, researchers at the B.C. Centre for Disease Control originally thought seasonal flu shots from 2008 might offer extra protection against the new pandemic strain. They were puzzled to find instead, seasonal flu vaccination almost doubled the risk of infection with pandemic flu."

Did you read that? An untested vaccine that health authorities all around the world urged everyone to get for their own protection against a novel, pandemic flu strain -- and a vaccine that they promised would also protect against seasonal flu -- actually made people who got it more prone to contracting the flu. This is now being openly admitted, affirming what independent news outlets like Natural News have been warning the public about for years.

And yet, despite this admission, these same health authorities are still trying to scare the public into rushing out and getting a flu shot. Huh? The vaccine doesn't work, they now say. And people who get it year after year are more prone to contracting the flu, they also say. But everyone should still rush out and get it, especially if they're in a high-risk category?

Peer-reviewed study reveals that unvaccinated people are most protected against influenza

At least six separate studies conducted by the same people that are still pushing the flu shot have confirmed that seasonal flu shots make people more prone to contracting the flu. The evidence is now overwhelming that, rather than impart immunity as long claimed, flu shots actually destroy the immune system and increase the risk of infection.

One would think that, now that the cat is out of the bag, these peddlers of quackery would quit while they're ahead, admit that they lied about flu shot safety and efficacy, and go out and find a real profession. Instead, they're continuing to push the seasonal flu shot, which as they now put it causes "interference" with people's immune systems, as they hype the soon unveiling of a "universal" flu shot that will be better than ever (fool me once, shame on you; fool me twice, well, you know the rest).

The real kicker here is that, in the same CBC News report, a study published in the journal Clinical Infectious Diseases is referenced, revealing that the people who are most protected from the flu are, wait for it -- the unvaccinated. So tell me again, why should anyone get a flu shot?