More vaccination, not less

Parents who don’t immunize their children against contagious diseases put everyone at risk

Parents who refuse to get their children vaccinated against contagious diseases often appear to believe that their personal preferences are more important than public health. They are wrong, and they could be dangerously wrong.

Ohio, and the nation, need to increase rates of child immunization; instead, rates are dropping. To reverse that trend, states need to tighten their rules for granting exemptions from vaccination.

Click here to read more Blade editorials

A woman infected with measles who visited Disneyland before Christmas started an outbreak that has spread from California to 10 other states — a graphic reminder of how highly contagious the disease is. In California, the Los Angeles Times reports, students who are not immunized are barred from school, infants who may have been exposed to measles are in quarantine, and infected adults remain hospitalized.

A Toledo Public Schools student who was feared to have measles last week turned out not to, fortunately. But last summer, a measles epidemic swept 27 states and included a record 644 cases — most of them in central Ohio.

In the 1960s, according to the U.S. Centers for Disease Control (CDC), measles killed roughly 450 people every year in this country. By 2000, though, effective vaccination regimens essentially eliminated the disease in America.

But as more parents reject immunization for their children, incidences of measles and other illnesses are increasing. In Ohio, the share of students in first through 12th grades who were immunized against major childhood diseases fell from almost 97 percent in 1998 to less than 90 percent in 2013.

Near-universal vaccination rates are needed to ensure “herd immunity” — a level of immunization high enough to protect children who are too young for vaccination, and others who can’t be vaccinated for medical reasons or for whom a vaccine doesn’t work. Yet as a national anti-immunization movement continues to gain adherents, such immunity is increasingly threatened.

Scientists have debunked any purported link between the vaccine for measles, mumps, and rubella and childhood autism. Yet some Hollywood celebrities continue to promote the canard, and that’s enough for those who want to believe it. The rumor that vaccines include mercury is equally false, but it also enjoys credence among critics of vaccination.

Vaccinations carry some risks: The CDC estimates that the measles vaccine will cause a severe allergic reaction in one of every million people who receive it. But among people who are infected with measles, more than one of every 1,000 die. One of every 20 children with measles also develops pneumonia, and one of every 1,000 gets encephalitis.

Ohio and Michigan are among a minority of states that allow parents to opt out of immunizing their children on the basis of personal beliefs, as well as medical and religious reasons. Michigan requires parents who seek nonmedical waivers to meet with a public health official to discuss the risks and benefits of vaccination. Ohio has no such mandate.

Growing numbers of pediatricians, in the Toledo area and across the state, refuse to treat children whose parents won’t immunize them. Although that decision is understandable, it also increases the risk of driving communicable diseases further underground.

It’s past time for elected officials to stand up to the selfishness, recklessness, and science-phobic superstition that too often accompany anti-immunization sentiments. Ohio, Michigan, and every other state that has personal-belief exemptions for vaccinations of public school students need to repeal them. Religious exemptions must be narrowly defined, and require more than vague assertions of individual rights.

Vaccination opponents complain that vaccine manufacturers are shielded from product liability lawsuits. Although that is an issue for Congress to examine, it does not justify an expansion, or maintenance, of vaccination exemptions.

With an infinitesimal number of exceptions, vaccination is safe and effective. Protecting the lives and health of all Americans cannot be allowed to depend on the irrational whims of the few.