Epidemic shows vaccine's weakness

Whooping cough records set in 2010 and 2014 have some questioning booster schedule

San Diego County saw more than 1,900 whooping cough cases in 2014, a record that far outpaced the last historic outbreak.

That was in 2010. Two records in four years.

This alarming level of virulence has public-health officials recalibrating their thinking about a disease that causes coughing bouts severe enough to break a rib — and is especially deadly for infants.

It has become increasingly clear that a whooping cough vaccine adopted a decade ago, while causing fewer side effects, wanes more quickly than its predecessor.

As researchers test new vaccine candidates, some are calling for a more frequent booster shot schedule to help keep immune systems inoculated.

Dr. John Bradley, director of the infectious-diseases division at Rady Children’s Hospital San Diego and an active participant on several national committees, said two records in four years should heighten a sense of urgency in drug development and standards of care.

“The fact that the epidemic is coming back gives the (U.S. Food and Drug Administration) and the vaccine companies more justification for doing the trials that are needed,” Bradley said. “It provides proof that what we saw in 2010 wasn’t a fluke. Now we’re establishing a pattern.”

BIG PUSH

Of course, it’s not like anyone has been sitting still.

After the 2010 epidemic, California doubled down on its vaccination efforts with the Legislature passing a new requirement that all seventh-graders receive a booster shot before returning to school in fall 2011.

There has also been a big public awareness push around infants, who are most susceptible to infection, with health departments telling pregnant women to get vaccinated in their third trimester so that some of their immunity is transferred to their child before birth.

The campaign has also worked to surround infants with a “ring of immunity” after birth, urging parents to make sure that anyone coming in to contact with their new arrival has had a recent booster.

Those campaigns do seem to have had some effect. While the 2014 outbreak generated a higher case load, there were fewer fatalities.

Statewide, 10 infants died in 2010 compared with three in 2014. Four years ago, San Diego County recorded one death, of a 1-month-old boy; there were none last year.

Dr. Wilma Wooten, the county’s public health officer, said that while the effectiveness of the current pertussis vaccine doesn’t last as long as a previous version, getting vaccinated does mean less severe illness for those who end up getting infected.

“We definitely have had more numbers, but the good news is that the cases have been more mild,” Wooten said.

Still, with the current vaccine situation, there is little hope of avoiding high caseloads every few years.

“I think it’s going to be our new normal until we get a different vaccine,” Wooten said.

EARLIER BOOSTERS

While there are several ongoing attempts to create new pertussis vaccines, there’s also a debate about administering booster doses earlier.

Bradley, the infectious disease expert at Rady Children’s Hospital, said the high infection tally in 2014, taken together with a deadly year in 2010, will likely push national health policy toward modifying the current vaccination schedule.

He said there’s a dialogue taking place between the FDA and vaccine manufacturers about administering the whooping cough vaccine booster shot at age 8 or 9 instead of between ages 10 and 12.

“This current epidemic in California gives urgency to the fact that we need to give those vaccines earlier to prevent all the disease that we’re seeing,” Bradley said.

But changing the schedule, and perhaps increasing the total number of booster shots received in childhood, is no simple matter.

After receiving a series of four shots at 2, 4, 6 and 18 months to build initial immunity, the first booster is administered between four and six years.

Giving another shot only five years later, Bradley said, is viewed with extreme caution by federal regulators.

Even though there has been no problem giving women a fresh booster for each pregnancy, Bradley said the FDA requires more data on the safety implications of a closer spacing between boosters.

“The FDA is interested in both efficacy and safety, but this is something that’s hard to study. You can’t take 100 children who are susceptible and just put them on a different schedule,” Bradley said.

And the public-health world is not yet ready to call for a wholesale change in the vaccination schedule.

In an email, the California Department of Public Health said it doesn’t support a more aggressive schedule since additional boosters are “not cost-effective because older children and adults rarely have severe complications from pertussis.”

ON THE FRONT LINES

As it has become clear that the current whooping cough vaccine wanes more quickly, some health providers have voluntarily gotten booster shots for themselves more frequently.

Dr. Mark Shalauta, who practices family medicine at Scripps Clinic in Rancho Bernardo and serves on the county’s public-health advisory committee, said he has increased his own booster schedule to once every five years. Scripps recommends that schedule for any health workers who are regularly in contact with children.

Adults are free to receive the shot more frequently than the current practice of once every 10 years, Shalauta said.

Working on the front lines with adults and children, he has seen plenty of whooping cough consequences in recent years.

“It can become very severe if it’s not treated relatively quickly. Patients can have coughing spells that are so severe they’re almost throwing up. I’ve definitely had people break ribs because they’re coughing so violently,” he said.

The key to avoiding sever symptoms, Shalauta added, is not waiting to long to seek treatment. Antibiotics can kill the pertussis bacteria, but only if the treatment course is started in time.

“Once you’ve had it for a few weeks, antibiotics aren’t going to make a bit of difference,” he said. “You definitely want to get on an antibiotic prescription within the first 21 days.”

But there’s no reason to head into the doctor’s office after a single day of coughing. After all, a cough is a major symptom of the flu, which traditionally reaches its seasonal peak in the winter months.

Coughs accompanied by body aches and fevers tend to be signs of influenza, Shalauta said.

“If you don’t have a fever or aches and you’ve been coughing for several days to the point where you feel like you’re going to throw up, or you can’t catch your breath, it’s a good idea to head in for a checkup,” he said.