Dr. Stephanie Seneff: Senior MIT Research Scientist, on Vaccine Safety.

For those who would think that all we need to do is remove the mercury or separate the MMR into three vaccines, senior MIT researcher Dr. Stephanie Seneff makes it clear that the vaccine issue is much more complicated than thimerosal and live viruses. 

I first learned about Dr. Seneff last summer when I read the story, Warning: Half of all Children Will Have Autism by 2025 

Dr. Stephanie Seneff, research scientist from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT), made a dire prediction earlier this month during an event sponsored by the Groton Wellness organization. She said, "At today's rate, by 2025, one in two children will be autistic."

Seneff was leading a presentation that showed a strong correlation between the increased use of Roundup starting in the early 1990's and the rising number of autism diagnoses over the past three decades. In 1975, 1 in 5,000 children were diagnosed with autism. The current rate is 1 in 68, and it shows no sign of slowing down.

We are now quite used to the stunning increases in the autism rate, announced every couple of years, usually just before the media reporting frenzy during April, Autism Awareness Month, when we annually light the world up in blue and pretend that a debilitating disorder when no known cause or cure is something to celebrate.  Each and every increase is accompanied by some official solemnly assuring us that they're not sure if THIS INCREASE really means more children have autism.  No one ever questions the numbers or the willingness of everyone--the medical community, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, and mainstream news outlets--to leave autism as some curious puzzle we just can't figure out yet.  There is never a demand for answers.  Never any alarm. 

When I read Dr. Seneff's prediction, I was stunned.  How much worse could things get?  This was certainly something that officials and doctors couldn't ignore. 

Incredibly Seneff's autism forecast didn't make the network news nor was there a New York Times headline: MIT Professor Warns 50 Percent of Children With Autism by 2025. 

There were autism websites that reported on the announcement, along with a story in Psychology Today called,  Autism Apocalypse by 2025?--What would happen if the prediction by MIT scientist Stephanie Seneff came true?  

This piece was by Amy S.F. Lutz who seemed to understand that this was, in her words, "a truly terrifying forecast."  Lutz noted that Seneff's background is electrical engineering and computer science, not medicine.  According to Lutz, the fact that Seneff is "still actively arguing that vaccines cause autism, a theory that has been repeatedly discredited through multiple studies published in peer reviewed journals" also lessened her credibility.  

Still Lutz was troubled by what Seneff predicted.  She wrote, Just last month, my husband and I were discussing that very possibility - as a hypothetical situation, not as an outcome predicted by a scientist at one of the world's most prestigious universities. What would we do if half of all children had autism? Would people still choose to reproduce? Would they be willing to take that risk? How would the government respond?"

I have to admit, my imagination failed me. I was a fiction writer in my previous life, and still I could not conceive of what we as a society would do if half the children born were autistic.

Lutz seemed to hold to the belief that children were somehow born with autism and that we're powerless to do anything about it.  She couldn't imagine how our country would be able to provide for massive numbers of disabled individuals.  She cited dollar figures that were not even close to what the lifetime cost of caring for someone with autism would likely be. 

Where was the demand to know why this is happening?  We're talking about CHILDREN WITH AUTISM.  Something is causing this.  Why didn't Lutz show any concern over the lack of a comparable rate among middle aged and older adults?  Do we just resign ourselves to nightmare of unending autism?

Sadly, this is the future.  Autism isn't going away.  The current generation with autism will age into adulthood with nowhere to go.  More and more children will be diagnosed with autism.  Evidently we'll be forced to recognize that autism is an epidemic of recent origin.  We'll have to admit that something in the environment is crippling massive numbers of children.  STILL, those in power will no doubt continue to blame factors OTHER THAN VACCINES.  It can never be the vaccines. 

(As far as the charge by Lutz that Dr. Seneff has no background in biological science, this is from the MIT website:

Stephanie Seneff is a Senior Research Scientist at the MIT Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Laboratory. She received the B.S. degree in Biophysics in 1968, the M.S. and E.E. degrees in Electrical Engineering in 1980, and the Ph.D degree in Electrical Engineering and Computer Science in 1985, all from MIT. For over three decades, her research interests have always been at the intersection of biology and computation: developing a computational model for the human auditory system, understanding human language so as to develop algorithms and systems for human computer interactions, as well as applying natural language processing (NLP) techniques to gene predictions. She has published over 170 refereed articles on these subjects, and has been invited to give keynote speeches at several international conferences. She has also supervised numerous Master's and PhD theses at MIT. In 2012, Dr. Seneff was elected Fellow of the International Speech and Communication Association (ISCA).

In recent years, Dr. Seneff has focused her research interests back towards biology. She is concentrating mainly on the relationship between nutrition and health. Since 2011, she has written over a dozen papers (7 as first author) in various medical and health-related journals on topics such as modern day diseases (e.g., Alzheimer, autism, cardiovascular diseases), analysis and search of databases of drug side effects using NLP techniques, and the impact of nutritional deficiencies and environmental toxins on human health.

I recently contacted Dr. Seneff and we talked about her views on autism--the rate and the cause.  I recorded her answers on Skype.

First of all, I asked about her forecast of one in every two children with autism by 2025.  This was her response:

I've been looking at the curves of the increase in autism.  It's quite alarming. This is what has caused me to devote all of my energy right now to try to figure out what the causes are.  You see the one in 150, then the one in 88, now the one in 68, you draw that graph, you extend it into the future.  What you need to realize, that one in 68, that's not kids being born today.  That's kids who are already twelve years old.  So we have to take that graph and already project it twelve years just to get to the people that are being born today. If you're talking 2025, which I'm saying, one in two, you need to extend that curve to 2037.  If you do that, it's comfortable to say that it will be one in two, if we don't change whatever is causing this.  And if it continues to go up on the curve that we already see, that's what it's going to be, one in two of the children being born in 2025 will end up with a diagnosis on the autism spectrum. 

Dr. Seneff explained what she believes is behind the epidemic increase in neurologically disabled children everywhere.

 I've identified three or four different toxic chemicals that I think are crucial to the autism epidemic, and these are specifically the aluminum and mercury in the vaccines, but also glutamate in the vaccines, which people don't realize.  And in conjunction with glyphosate, which is the active ingredient in Roundup, the pervasive herbicide that is being used in huge amounts on the GMO Roundup Ready crops today.  This has been a continually escalating usage of this chemical on the food crops--the core crops of the processed food industry, with almost zero regulation on how much residue is allowed.  There's regulation, but it's hardly ever tested as far as how much is in the food.   And so we don't know how much we're getting exposed to, but we can be sure we're getting exposed to more today than we were previously because of the usage of Roundup on Roundup Ready crops has gone up exactly in step with the increase in autism.  It's a prefect match. 

Here Dr. Seneff advises parents on what they can do.

What I think people don't appreciate is that the vaccines and the glyphosate are synergistically toxic.  The glyphosate is making the chemicals in the vaccines much more dangerous to the children than they would otherwise be.  As I said, the glutamate is very interesting because glyphosate disrupts the body's ability to metabolize glutamate, so the glutamate becomes toxic and gets into the brain.  I think that's the critical thing with the MMR vaccine, which has not been appreciated even by even the people who believe the MMR may be linked to autism. Until we can find a way to produce vaccines without using these toxic chemicals, we need to really worry about the extent to which we're vaccinating our children.  We need to cut it way back.  And if I were a young mother today, I would try very hard to get out of all the vaccines that contain aluminum, mercury and glutamate.  That's a pretty big list.  That's DTaP, Hepatitis B, MMR, the measles vaccine, the flu shot, all of those. . .  . I would like to eliminate them.  . . . If you don't choose to eliminate, you can actually delay--and that's much, much better than getting them on schedule, because a newborn child has a very weak immune system.  To give that child a Hepatitis B which contains a substantial amount of aluminum is very dangerous.  And now they've added the Gardasil vaccine, which has a very toxic form of aluminum in it, that they're giving to the teenagers, which is just on top of whatever load they might have accumulated up to that point.  The U.S. has the highest vaccination requirements in the world, along with the highest infant mortality rates among the top industrial countries.  If we're getting all those vaccines, it's somehow not compensating for whatever else we're poisoning ourselves with, which of course might be the case.  . . . When you look at the risk benefit ratio of the vaccines, it comes out short. You really have to think about whether it's worth the cost.  . . . Do you want your child to be permanently damaged in order to prevent it from getting measles?  It doesn't make sense.  I think we really need to question whether the vaccines are an obligatory part of a child's program. I certainly think they're not, particularly because they are so dangerous.  And in conjunction with the glyphosate, which is making them much worse. 

Dr. Seneff is among a growing group of experts willing to speak out and challenge the safety of a one-size-fits-all vaccine schedule.  Here are a number of others in science and medicine that I've covered over the past seven years.

2007, Boyd Haley, PhD

2008, Frank Engley, MD

2009, Andrew Wakefield, MD

2010, Mayer Eisenstein, MD

2010, Bob Sears, MD

2011, Julie Buckley, MD

2011, Richard Halverson, MD

2012, Chris Shaw, PhD

2012, David Berger, MD

2013, Toni Bark, MD

2013 Ken Stoller, MD

2013, Michael Schachter, MD

2013, Mitchell Fleisher, MD

2014, Kelly Brogan, MD

2014, Andrew Wakefield, MD

2014, Bob Sears, MD

2014, Toni Bark, MD

Unfortunately, those in positions of power don't want to hear from them.  The media likewise won't cover their views and their malfeasance is harming us all.

More research and talks by Dr. Seneff:

Dr. Stephanie Seneff presentation on harmful effects of glyphosate, Oct, 2013.  (She begins to speak at 19:30)

Dr. Mercola: Why the Use of Glyphosate in Wheat Has Radically Increased Celiac Disease, Sept 2014.

Roundup: The "Nontoxic" Chemical that May Be Destroying our Health, by Dr. Stephanie Seneff, Oct 2013.

Empirical Data Confirm Autism Symptoms Related to Aluminum and Acetaminophen Exposure, 2012.

Diminished brain resilience syndrome: A modern day neurological pathology of increased susceptibility to mild brain trauma, concussion, and downstream neurodegeneration, 2014.

Defining Autism with Dr Stephanie Seneff (June 2014)