Confirmed cases of influenza, respiratory illness in Muskegon County on the rise

MUSKEGON, MI – The 2014-15 influenza season is picking up its pace statewide and throughout Muskegon County.

The latest figures available from Public Health – Muskegon County indicate that the department has documented a few dozen laboratory-confirmed flu virus illnesses since the first known episode—a case of Influenza A—was recorded in late October.

As of Dec. 15, the local agency had recorded 57 cases since the flu season officially began during the fall season. Unconfirmed reports of influenza-like illness from local schools and daycares had also increased right before students left for winter break.

Public Health - Muskegon County Nursing Supervisor Pat Krehn said for the week ending Friday, Dec. 19, the educational facilities reported 682 flu-like illnesses compared to the 291 flu-like illnesses that were reported around the same time last year.

Mercy Health spokeswoman Joan Kessler confirmed Monday that the hospital system's emergency room personnel were seeing an increasing volume of influenza-related visits.

Meanwhile, the Michigan Department of Community Health's latest influenza report released Monday characterized influenza activity as "widespread" across the state. The department noted there had been 185 flu-related hospitalizations as of Dec. 20.

As of mid-December, Washtenaw County had already confirmed about 80 cases and 14 hospitalizations, while local hospitals in Wayne and Kent counties, among other regions, said they were experiencing higher-than-average emergency room flu-related visits.

Flu activity peaks between December and February but can begin as early as October and end as late as May, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.

Public Health – Muskegon County spokeswoman Dori Peters said residents are urged to get one of the seasonal flu shots or intranasal sprays available at local doctor offices, drug store pharmacies or at the health department.

"It takes about two weeks for the body to build immunity after receiving the vaccination," Peters said.

The CDC strongly recommends that pregnant women, children 5 years and younger and adults 50 and older get the shot form of the vaccine and not the less popular intranasal mist.

The department has said that people who become ill even after immunization should expect milder ailments compared to the symptoms they would have experienced if they did not get the vaccine.

CDC scientists and doctors still recommend the seasonal flu shot to everyone 6 months and older although a newer strain caused by the mutation of the H3N2 influenza virus is not covered in the seasonal dosage release. Federal health officials said the ongoing influenza season is expected to be more severe than the last year because most diagnoses so far are caused by the more aggressive Type A strain.

The CDC said the quadrivalent vaccine, first made available in the United States in 2013, is designed to protect against two influenza A viruses and two influenza B viruses.

Most insurance plans cover the full cost of immunization, but doses for regular and quadrivalent doses are available for out-of-pocket prices between $15 and $50.

As of late December, Benson Sav-Mor Pharmacy, located at 961 Spring St., was running a $15 special for the regular trivalent flu shot. The drugstore is also selling the quadrivalent version of the flu vaccine for $25.

A store associate on Monday said the location had been out of Tamiflu, a common flu treatment and preventative medication, for about two weeks.

Krehn said Public Health – Muskegon County had about 212 flu doses for adults left as of Tuesday, Dec. 30.

The agency also had about 155 free flu vaccine doses available through the Vaccines for Children program. In order to qualify for the federally-funded initiative, residents must be 18 years and younger and meet at least one of the following criteria: uninsured, underinsured, Medicaid-eligible, American Indian or Alaska Native.

Common symptoms associated with the contagious respiratory illness include fever, chills, cough, sore throat and runny or stuffy nose. However, signs can also include bodily aches, headaches and fatigue.

Local health officials said headache, fever and extreme exhaustion are more common among those fighting influenza rather than the common cold. Likewise, stuffy nose, sneezing and sore throat are more common cold symptoms.

Most flu-stricken people recover within a few days to just under two weeks but the minority may develop severe or even life-threatening complications such as pneumonia. Ninety percent of flu-related deaths occur in adults 65 years and older, according to the CDC.

CDC officials said the virus typically spreads to others within 6 feet mainly through droplets that disperse when someone coughs, sneezes or talks. A person may also obtain the flu virus by touching contaminated surfaces and then touching their mouth or nose.

To help fight the virus, health officials recommend proper diet, good sleeping habits, staying away from sick people, thorough dish washing, avoiding facial touching and practicing good hand hygiene by washing hands with soap and hot water for at least 20 seconds.

Muskegon County experienced the most severe flu season since 2010 during influenza season 2012-13. During The final week of 2012, local health officials had recorded about 80 confirmed flu cases.

WHERE TO FIND FLU SHOTS

Public Health Muskegon County

209 East Apple Avenue, Muskegon

Seasonal Flu Shot, $27

Seasonal Flu Intranasal Mist, $37

Benson Sav-Mor Pharmacy

961 Spring Street, Muskegon

Seasonal Flu Shot, $15 (Special)

Seasonal Quadrivalent Flu Shot, $25

Target

5057 South Harvey Street, Norton Shores

Seasonal Flu Shot, $24.99

Seasonal Quadrivalent Flu Shot, $31.99

*Some Tamiflu capsules may be available

CVS

2010 East Apple Avenue, Muskegon Township

Seasonal Flu Shot, $31.99

Rite Aid

Various locations

Seasonal Flu Shot, $31.99

Seasonal Quadrivalent Flu Shot, $39.99

Meijer

Various locations

Seasonal Flu Shot, $27.99

Walmart

Various locations

Seasonal Flu Shot, $25

Seasonal Quadrivalent Flu Shot, $48

Walgreens

Various locations

Seasonal Flu Shot, $31.99

Seasonal Flu Intranasal Mist, $39.99

Seasonal High-Dose for seniors, $54.99

Seasonal Quadrivalent, $39.99