Mom loses son to vaccine-preventable disease

SEATTLE, Wash. -- As the measles outbreak prompts renewed debate about the importance of vaccine requirements for children, one Seattle mom is sharing her story of losing her first born son to a now vaccine-preventable disease.

For Linda Dahlstrom-Anderson, the debate about whether to vaccinate children has little do with ideology, politics or religion and a lot to do with true and utter heartbreak.

"He was incredibly joyful and sparkly and curious, and was just about to crawl at the point he died," said Dahlstrom-Anderson, remembering her first born, Phoenix.

He came into this world December 3, 2004, and died just over seven months later, killed by a disease so powerful, Phoenix died only hours after his mother learned he was sick.

"I just thought, how is it possible? We just had him. He was just here and so alive and so vital," Dahlstrom-Anderson said.

Phoenix died from Strain B of Neisseria meningitidis, a strain of the disease without a vaccine at the time.

"It blows up everything you think you know about the world," Dahlstrom-Anderson said. "I spent a very long time trying to blame myself. I really spent a long time trying to make sense of it."

Just over three months ago, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration approved Trumenba, the first vaccine for the strain of meningitidis that killed Phoenix. It's approved for individuals 10 through 25 years of age.

As soon as Dahlstrom-Anderson's second born, Gabriel, is old enough, he'll get the vaccine. Right now, he is only eight.

"Since it keeps us safe, I just think it's really good for us," Gabriel Anderson said.

For most kids, a shot is nothing more than a painful prick. That's not so for Gabriel.

"He understands the reason because it is very real for our family in a way that it's not for a lot of people," Dahlstrom-Anderson said.

Today, Dahlstrom-Anderson tries to teach Gabriel about his big brother through stories.

She let us in on a moment she showed Gabriel the small box of items bound by a string that they left the hospital with after Phoenix died.

"That was his hand print," Dahlstrom-Anderson said, picking up a piece of heavy paper with a marking on it.

"Wow, that was his hand print?" Gabriel asked.

Gabriel knows his brother well through stories.

"I know that his feet were really big, like probably like this," Gabriel said, showing us where Phoenix's feet would have compared to his own.

Gabriel said he wishes he had his brother to play with and go to school with.

"I see all these brothers and sisters together, and I kind of feel sad that I don't have a brother," Gabriel said.

Dahlstrom-Anderson wishes her son hadn't died. Nowadays, the moments she gets reading a bedtime story to Gabriel have heightened meaning.

"Appreciating the moment and the people in your life," Dahlstrom-Anderson said. "I think with our son, Gabriel, I have such joy that he is here."

Dahlstrom-Anderson hopes her pain will spare other parents and convince them certain things, like getting vaccinated, aren't worth letting go.

"That's the thing about vaccinations is there are now things that can be done, and it's a very simple shot," Dahlstrom-Anderson said. "I think that is my feeling, when I hear people talking about not wanting to get vaccinated for certain things, is they just don't know. They just don't. We don't see the reality that I saw. People haven't, thankfully, held their dead child in their arms."