Immunisation alarm

It is a cause for concern that as many as 2.7m Nigerian kids were not vaccinated against measles

For an alarmingly great number of newborn babies in the country, the undesirable possibility of measles infection is not only real but also high, considering the latest statistics released by the World Health Organisation (WHO) and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), in separate publications. According to the new data, published in the WHO Weekly Epidemiological Report and the CDC Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report, 2.7 million Nigerian children were not vaccinated against measles at nine months of age last year. Sadly, this is contrary to the WHO recommendation, and the reports said such failure increased the risk of serious health challenges like pneumonia, diarrhoea, encephalitis and blindness, among the unimmunised children.

More worrying is the truth that measles could lead to death in extreme cases. Indeed, the WHO report said: “The vast majority of deaths from measles occur in developing countries.” Furthermore, “over 70 per cent of estimated global measles death” in 2013 reportedly occurred in six countries, India, Nigeria, Pakistan, Ethiopia, Indonesia and Democratic Republic of Congo. These countries, in that order, were identified in connection with more than 60 per cent of the estimated 21.5 million unimmunised children last year.

It is tragic that the figures showed a rise in the number of deaths from measles, from an estimated 122,000 in 2012 to 145,700 in 2013, meaning that the target of a 95 per cent reduction in measles-related deaths between 2000 and 2015 is unlikely to be achieved. It is instructive that Dr. Peter Strebel of the WHO Department of Immunisation, Vaccines, and Biologicals, was quoted as saying: “Poor progress in increasing measles vaccination coverage has resulted in large outbreaks of this highly contagious disease, throwing the 2015 elimination targets off-track.”

Lamentably, the disease is said to have received a boost in 2013 largely as a result of outbreaks in China, the Democratic Republic of Congo and Nigeria. It may be recalled that historically low vaccination levels in northern Nigeria reportedly sank lower from early 2000 following the controversy about the motive for polio vaccines, which radical Islamic preachers claimed was a Western move to make Muslims infertile and infect them with HIV.  It is not surprising that this situation reportedly led to a significant increase in cases of measles and the related deaths of hundreds of children in the region.

The wisdom in vaccination may be better appreciated against the background of the description of measles as “an airborne disease that is spread through respiration (contact with fluids from an infected person’s nose and mouth, either directly or through aerosol transmission via coughing or sneezing), and is highly contagious—90% of people without immunity sharing living space with an infected person will catch it.”

So, it is easy to understand that unvaccinated populations, especially vulnerable babies, are at risk from the disease. In this context, the importance of public enlightenment and awareness cannot be overemphasised; and anti-scientific sentiments, particularly of ethnic and religious colouration, should not be accommodated. It goes without saying that effective advancements in medical science can bring about the elimination of the disease, and that is the point of the WHO target.

Nigeria cannot afford to be seen as a negative factor in the otherwise progressive march towards the elimination of measles. In addition to promptly addressing the education aspect, the country must tackle other problematic issues, particularly its health system; and conflict and population displacement, which are also said to have interfered with vaccination efforts.

Perhaps the last word should come from Dr. Strebel who said: “Countries urgently need to prioritise maintaining and improving immunisation coverage. Failure to reverse this alarming trend could jeopardise the momentum generated by a decade of achievements in reducing measles mortality.” We couldn’t agree more.