Disney, Measles and the Fantasyland of Vaccine Perfection

Americans, surely you can tell when something sounds too good to possibly be true!

Okay, my fellow Americans.  Time to turn off your TVs, put down your propaganda-papers (i.e. newspapers), and put on your thinking caps.  Vaccines are being touted as a quick fix, for everyone, regardless of age, weight, family history, or health status (before it can even be observed or determined in the case of fetuses, newborns, infants, and toddlers!), for an ever-growing number of infectious and non-infectious diseases, as though there are no adverse side effects or short- and long-term consequences to consider.  Clearly, there's a big problem with what people are being told and sold when it comes to vaccines.  Yet, worldwide, people are being manipulated by the false promise of the end to all disease with nothing more than a quick jab, pill, or spray up the nose.  Beware of being manipulated by such farce.  Here are a few facts and thoughts for you to consider, especially with regards to all of the Disneyland measles hype.

1.  Has there been any laboratory confirmation of even one case of the supposed measles related to Disneyland?  If yes, was the confirmed case tested to determine whether it was wild-type measles or vaccine-strain measles?  If not, why not?  These are important questions to ask. Is it measles or not? If yes, what kind, because if it's vaccine-strain measles, then that means it is the vaccinated who are contagious and spreading measles resulting in what the media likes to label "outbreaks" to create panic (strange how they've completely missed the Autism outbreak going on for the past 25 years). It would be what one might call vaccine fallout.  People who receive live-virus vaccines, such as the MMR, can then shed that live virus, for up to many weeks...and can infect others.  Multiply that in your head by all of the people who receive not only the MMR live-virus vaccine, but many others. Other live-virus vaccines include the nasal flu vaccine, shingles vaccine, rotavirus vaccine, chicken pox vaccine, and yellow fever vaccine.

It has recently been discovered that those who are vaccinated with the DTaP and TDaP vaccines, if subsequently exposed to and infected with pertussis, can then harbor pertussis in their throats, for weeks, which can then spread to others causing them to contract pertussis, even if the one harboring it in their throat remains asymptomatic.  Talk about a hidden disease vector!  Parents of infants should be wary of those who've received either of these vaccines, because if a DTaP or TDaP recipient is infected with pertussis, they may not know it, and since they might not have the telling cough, then no one else has any way to know they might be contagious and transmitting pertussis, either.  This certainly dismantles the "cocooning" theory that has been used to scare parents of newborns and infants into not permitting any adult, including Grandma and Grandpa, near their baby who hasn't had a TDaP booster.

Thus, it is often the vaccinated who are spreading disease, despite what the media tell you, media that are heavily supported and influenced by pharmaceutical advertising dollars.  Why aren't those who receive live-virus vaccines quarantined in their homes until it can be confirmed that they are no longer contagious with the diseases against which they were vaccinated? Why are they being allowed into schools, hospitals, grocery stores, and the like?  Why are those who have received the DTaP and TDaP vaccines not mandated to be tested for pertussis being harbored in their throats before being allowed near newborns and infants?

2.  Did you know that historical statistical figures for reported measles cases have been fraught with error?  For but one example, I will refer to doctor-diagnosed "measles" cases in the UK in the late 1990s, where a serious problem emerged.  A government scientist discovered that only 1 in 40 reported cases of measles was actually confirmed to be measles after lab testing. This discovery throws into question historical, and current, figures for measles. If reported cases are not required to be lab-confirmed, then this scientist’s discovery would lead us to believe that there has been gross over-reporting of measles cases, past and present.

Daily Telegraph 8 January 1997 London (Europe Today): "97.5% of the times that British doctors diagnose measles they are wrong", says a publication of the Public Health Laboratory service. The mistake being made by National Health GP's was found when the services tested the saliva of more than 12,000 children who had been diagnosed as having measles. Roger Buttery, an adviser on transmissible diseases at the Cambridge and Huntingdon Health Department, said that the majority of doctors "say they can recognize measles a mile off, but we now know that this illness occurs only in 2.5% of the cases." Buttery says that doctors classify as measles many other viruses that also cause spots. He found eight different viruses during the survey in East Anglia. One of them, parvovirus, gives symptoms similar to German measles. The reason for the high rate of error puzzled Buttery. "Doctors are neither vague nor careless," he said. The solution is to defer the diagnosis until more detailed information can be got. There are 5,000 to 6,000 cases of measles registered each year in the United Kingdom, but these findings now call most of them into doubt."

Geez, ever wonder if that might be happening at Disneyland, and beyond...and for multiple diseases against which we vaccinate, including the "flu"?

3.  Why isn’t the media reporting on the ineffectiveness and the dangers of the MMR vaccine, as exposed and evidenced by recent whistleblowers...2 from Merck, and 1 from the CDC? Again, one must ask why America's mainstream media have refused to report on these whistleblowers (can you say cha-ching from those non-stop pharma ads on TV and in the propaganda-papers), especially given the gravity of the vaccine research fraud they have exposed, and what that fraud means for parents making vaccine decisions, not to mention what it means for the vulnerable and innocent children receiving the vaccines.

4.  Why have parents been denied choice with regards to being allowed to choose monovalent vaccines over the trivalent MMR vaccine?  Ever since Dr. Andrew Wakefield dared to do the unthinkable...i.e. question a vaccine (gasp! like big pharma would ever sell a product that might cause problems, or death...gasp again!), in this case, the MMR vaccine...government officials and committee members decided they did not like the people questioning vaccines, so they colluded with Merck and other profiteers to stop the production of the monovalent measles, mumps, and rubella vaccines, forcing consumers to use the trivalent MMR vaccine (a 3-in-1 vaccine, which has the potential to be far more dangerous than individual vaccines given separately and at different times).

*See footnote at the bottom to see Merck's "explanation" of why they discontinued the monovalent M, M, and R vaccines.  Then, look up who comprises the ACIP (see anyone who might possibly have a conflict of interest, say someone who might just profit from the approval and sale of vaccines?).  Ask yourself who the "professional societies" might be, and if they by chance might just happen to greatly profit from vaccines and their numerous after-effects.  And those "scientific leaders", might they be scientists who work at or for Merck, or have a chair endowed for them by Merck? Last mentioned are customers.  Guess those customers who want to have a choice, and who want the 3 monovalent vaccines, don't matter much to Merck.

5.  Clearly, the MMR is not the highly effective vaccine it is touted to be, as evidenced by so many vaccinated individuals reportedly contracting the measles (and mumps, for that matter).  Nor is the MMR vaccine the highly safe vaccine it is touted to be, as evidenced by reports to the Vaccine Adverse Events Reporting System.  Many more people in the U.S. have died from this vaccine (and from the MMR-Varicella quadrivalent vaccine) than from the measles in the past 2 decades, and parents need to factor that fact into their decision whether or not to vaccinate their children. 

6.  If babies under age 12-15 months are contracting actual measles, one must ask 2 questions:  a.) Is the mom exclusively breastfeeding so that maternal immunity is being passed on to her baby?  If not, the baby misses out on important protection gained from its mother’s immunity, and may be more susceptible to illness. (I realize that not every mother is able to breastfeed. I have helped a mother who didn’t produce enough breastmilk to connect with other nursing mothers who were willing to share their surplus, which is something moms in this situation might want to consider).  If the baby was unable to nurse properly from the get-go, look no further than the effects of the birth dose of the Hep B vaccine, which has been shown to negatively affect innate infant reflexes needed to locate a mother’s breast and latch on to it.  b.)  If the mom was vaccinated with the MMR herself at any point, her ability to acquire and pass on natural, protective immunity to her infant via breastfeeding has been impaired, possibly ruined…meaning the vaccine is to blame, not the unvaccinated.

7.  If parents are taking their very young children to dirty, unsanitary places with thousands and thousands of people, they have made the choice to expose their children to multitudinous germs and illnesses from multitudinous people, leaving them in no position to finger point at others.  It can, and should, be argued that to the maximum extent possible, infants should be kept at home for the first few months of life and away from extremely crowded places for perhaps their first couple of years, giving their immune systems time to develop and mature. 

8.  If vaccines work, the vaccinated should be protected.  If they don't work, ask yourself why are you allowing them and exposing your child to such incredible risks?  Furthermore, if they don't work, as is often the case, feel free to have your child vaccinated again and again (no one is stopping you), but don't expect others to vaccinate their children with scores of products that have long track records of not working and of wreaking havoc.

9.  It was not ever, is not today, and will not be tomorrow my child's job to protect your child, in any way, shape, or form.  That is the parent's job.  Period.  Ask yourself who exactly is making these decisions as to which child is more worthy of living, since death and disability are possible consequences of both the disease and the vaccine.  Since there is a decision to be made, it should reside with the parent, or with the vaccine recipient, not with anyone else, and most certainly not with the ones profiting from vaccines, be it directly (pharmaceutical companies, doctors, and hospitals) or indirectly (elected officials, government regulators, and trade industry groups, all of whom enjoy plenty of big pharma dollars and perks).

10.  There is no longer any excuse, nor is it acceptable, for any parent, doctor, media person, elected official, or government regulator to state the false claims that vaccines are safe and effective.  They are neither, and not even one has ever been proven to be such.  As a matter of fact, "highly secret documents" from pharmaceutical companies, in addition to pharmaceutical company and CDC whistleblowers, continue to reveal and expose on a regular basis that vaccines are neither safe nor effective, and never have been. 

Additionally, the U.S. Supreme Court has officially and legally declared vaccines to be "unavoidably unsafe”.  For those who find that a hard-to-decipher double negative, that means that vaccines are inherently dangerous, yet, they are mandated for children.  As a colleague of mine recently commented, “If you don’t have a choice about unavoidably unsafe products, what the hell choices do you have that are meaningful?”

It is also imperative to remember that in 1986, the U.S. Congress was foolish enough to cave in to a bunch of whining vaccine-making pharmaceutical companies who said they weren't going to make vaccines anymore because they were losing so many costly lawsuits due to their vaccines killing and maiming people.  This whining, no doubt paired with lobbying, resulted in Congress indemnifying vaccine-making pharmaceutical companies, and those who administer vaccines, from liability for injuries and deaths caused by vaccines.  Yes, you heard that correctly.  Not Liable.  With that Act of Congress, any incentive or means of accountability to make a safe vaccine product flew right out the window.

It is critical for any person who is considering vaccination for themselves, their children, or those in their care, such as elderly parents, to take the time to educate himself/herself regarding vaccine history, vaccine ingredients, vaccine adverse events, vaccine trials, vaccine research fraud, vaccine injuries, and vaccine deaths.  Vaccination is a risky medical procedure, and as such, it should not be entered into lightly or without due diligence.

11.  Vaccine mandates for children are extremely age discriminatory, and parents should begin to sue over this fact. Notice that those doing the mandating aren't rolling up their sleeves and pant legs, and dropping their drawers, for 70+ dastardly vaccine cocktails.  Rather, they sit back and order that infants, toddlers, and young children be shot up to hell and back, stripping parents of their rights and freedoms, just so long as those pharmaceutical companies keep filling their campaign coffers and providing perks.

12.  It is time to stop delegating your health care decisions to your pediatrician and instead become your own expert.  Your child is counting on you.  Your child's pediatrician is not the vaccine expert you think he/she is.  Their "vaccine training" in medical school, reported to be as brief as 2 hours, revolved around learning how and where to give a tiny baby up to 12 vaccines at one time from 8 syringes.  Once you allow the toxic cocktails of heinous vaccine materials to enter your child's body, you can't retrieve them.  They have now entered a closed system, a system which includes your child's brain, nerves, and blood, during critical developmental periods. Think about that.  Think hard.  There is no do-over.  Trust me, I speak from experience about the no do-over part.

13.  Glimpse of our future, which has actually already arrived.  Have you thought about who is going to be able to defend our country now that we have children being environmentally injured to the extent of 1 in 6 having a neurodevelopmental disorder (that's code name for brain damage), 1 in 11 having asthma, 1 in 12 having food allergies (some of which are life-threatening, and all of which are life-altering), 1 in 50 having Autism, 1 in 400 having Type 1 Diabetes, many having GI and colon problems, seizure disorders, etc.? 

Here's how it's going to look when the alarm sounds and our health- and development-impaired young Americans are called to battle:  "Wait!  I need to grab my EpiPen!"  "Well, I need my inhaler."  "I need gluten-free, casein-free, soy-free to-go meals!”  "I can't find my prescription meds!"  "NO ONE can bring peanuts, or any tree nuts for that matter, on this mission!"  "Oh no! My insulin pod just fell off, and I don't have a new one to put on!"  "I'm having chronic diarrhea, so I can't come along today!"  "Well, I haven't pooped for a month and my stomach is killing me, so I can’t go either!”  "I can't follow more than 2 instructions at once, so I'm already confused and we haven't even left yet."  And then there are the ones who can’t talk at all, aren’t toilet-trained, and who have the skill level of a toddler…they won’t be eligible to serve in any, way, shape, or form.  Apparently, the military is already experiencing this, and has written a report titled Ready, Willing, and Unable to Serve.  This is our future, folks.

Tragically, these same issues have affected our kids' back-to-school-supplies. Instead of scissors, crayons, and pencils, it's EpiPens, inhalers, insulin, prescription meds, special foods, and lengthy IEPs.

14.  If you still are not getting the picture, then please hotfoot it over to your nearest elementary, junior high, or high school and ask to see the special education classrooms (that's right, plural, classrooms).  Notice how many kids are in each one.  Notice how oddly behaved they are.  This is our new normal.  Vaccinate your child, and you'll stand a good chance of experiencing firsthand what I'm talking about.

15.  A warning, one I wish had been issued to me back in 1992:  Beware of those "well-baby" appointments.  Your baby may never be well again if you allow him/her to be vaccinated.

Please don't be led like a lamb to the slaughter with your baby in hand, and a fistful of syringes in the nurse's hand...syringes destined for your tiny baby's developing body, ready to destroy its immune system, nervous system, neurological development, and health, all in one fell swoop.  Those syringes might even take your child's life. 

Don't be manipulated.  Be responsible for making your own well-researched decisions.

Laura Hayes

Mother of Vaccine Injured Children

Passionate about educating others and encouraging them to learn about the myriad dangers and inefficacies of vaccines, the fallacy of the theory behind them, and the vast web of fraud and deception involved in supporting and mandating them

*Footnote, on Merck letterhead:

October 21, 2009   

Dear Health Care Provider:

Monovalent vaccines no longer available for measles, mumps, rubella

Based on input from the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP), professional societies, scientific leaders, and customers, Merck has decided not to resume production of ATTENUVAX® (Measles Virus Vaccine Live), MUMPSVAX® (Mumps Virus Vaccine Live), and MERUVAX®II (Rubella Virus Vaccine Live). This science-based decision will support vaccination of the largest group of appropriate individuals.

http://www.breakspearmedical.com/files/documents/monovalentMessage.pdf (to read full letter)