Red-Blue America: Should Americans be required to get vaccinated?

This one should be easy. Vaccinations protect individuals and whole communities from debilitating or deadly diseases. People who refuse to vaccinate their kids for fear of them developing autism or suffering some other remote harm would put their children’s lives and the lives of other children in jeopardy — for a folly.

But it’s a free country, more or less. And it’s a divided country, as the coverage of presidential candidates trying to pander to everyone on the vaccination question certainly shows.

Would-be Republican presidential candidates find themselves in an impossible position. No political candidate can truly speak his mind anymore, if he ever could. A question as seemingly straightforward as whether parents should immunize their kids against preventable illnesses ends up being a clumsy exercise of “on-the-one-hand, and-on-the-other...”

At the same time, no Republican presidential candidate worthy of serious consideration would endorse the outlandish idea of jailing parents for refusing to vaccinate their kids, as a USA Today columnist argued last month. No Democrat would take that position, either. The idea should be offensive to Americans who at least profess to value individual liberty, regardless of party.

But what about mandatory vaccinations with penalties and consequences short of jail? That’s a policy debate worth having.

Mandatory vaccinations aren’t unheard of in the United States. Massachusetts in 1809 passed the nation’s first law requiring every citizen to be vaccinated for smallpox.

What if instead of the government applying direct pressure on people to vaccinate, the law made life too inconvenient for people not to vaccinate? For example, lawmakers could tweak public accommodation laws to let businesses discriminate on the basis of vaccination.

It would be inconvenient, of course. Anti-vax parents would howl with indignation. But personal choices often have broad consequences. And their indignation should not trump the public health.

Ben Boychuk (bboychuk@city-journal. org) is associate editor of the Manhattan Institute’s City Journal.