Epidemic of irresponsibility widens measles threat

Somebody went to Disneyland in December with a case of the measles, and at least 94 people got sick. Several cases have appeared in eight other states and Mexico, too. Hundreds more people have been quarantined. Public health officials worry that the epidemic could get worse as tens of thousands of sports fans converge on Phoenix for Super Bowl XLIX.

And all of it could have been prevented, if not for the blinkered attitudes of a few.

The California Department of Health this week confirmed 79 cases of measles in the state, of which 52 have been linked directly to last month’s outbreak at the Happiest Place on Earth. Health officials know for certain that at least 34 patients were unvaccinated, three were partly vaccinated, and five were fully vaccinated.

Now, six of those unvaccinated cases were infants, meaning they were too young to receive the MMR (measles-mumps-rubella) vaccine that most American children get as a matter of course. Ordinarily kids receive the vaccine after their first birthday, and again between the ages of 4 and 6.

So those babies and their parents are blameless. Pray for them.

But the parents of older unvaccinated children are much less deserving of our sympathy. At least 23 cases are located in Orange County – the largest concentration in the state by far, which makes sense given Disneyland’s location.

Orange County also happens to be a haven for the anti-vaccination movement. California law allows parents to opt their kids out of vaccines with a “personal belief exemption” signed by a pediatrician. Countywide, about 3 percent of kindergartners have exemptions, compared with just 2 percent in L.A. County. But in certain school districts – Capistrano Unified, for example – exemptions run between 8 and 9 percent.

So a lack of vaccination made this outbreak possible. We’re facing an epidemic of measles because we have an epidemic of irresponsibility.

Measles is ridiculously contagious. Unlike the Ebola virus, which threw the nation into a tizzy this past autumn, measles is likely to sicken 90 percent of the people who come into close proximity with an infected patient.

To put the matter in proper perspective: the United States had 635 confirmed cases of measles last year, versus 10 cases of Ebola – only two of which were contracted inside the country, both by nurses who treated Ebola patients from West Africa.

Your odds of getting Ebola? Almost infinitesimal. Your odds of getting measles? High if you haven’t been vaccinated, greatly diminished if you have.

The U.S. Centers for Disease Control says two doses of the MMR vaccine are 97 percent effective against measles infection. Obviously, 97 percent means there will be a few who get sick even though they’ve been vaccinated – as we’ve seen with this outbreak. So it goes.

And because nothing is 100 percent guaranteed effective, that also means some people will have adverse reactions to the vaccine itself. In a nation of 322 million, that would mean a few million people – mostly kids – will suffer.

It’s a risk, but one that’s worthwhile. On balance, it’s better to be vaccinated than unvaccinated. The more people who are vaccinated, the less likely disease will spread.

Yet millions of Americans believe that vaccinations are harmful. In the face of all evidence, one-third of Americans believe a link exists between vaccinations and autism. They reject the possibility that autism has a genetic component, or that medical science has become more adept at identifying children on the spectrum.

Many parents – often well-educated people in wealthy communities – are convinced that vaccinations are just a way for greedy pharmaceutical companies and complacent doctors to bolster their bottom lines. Never mind that vaccines tend to lose money. They refuse to “sacrifice” their children to Big Pharma, even if that means their children contract a potentially fatal and wholly preventable disease.

Here’s where personal belief collides with the public good. We are individuals with God-given rights. But we live among other people with rights as well. Your right to refuse to vaccinate your children ends where my children’s right to avoid needless exposure to infection begins.

Even from a libertarian point of view, vaccination is a matter of rational self-interest. If living a healthy, autonomous life is one end of freedom, then vaccination is a means to that end.

But the anti-vaccination movement has taken an awful toll. How many more epidemics will it take before this wretched belief recedes to the fringes, where it belongs?

Contact the writer: Ben Boychuk (bboychuk@city-journal.org) is an associate editor of the Manhattan Institute’s City Journal.