Vaccination debate needs a heavy dose of reasoned thought: Opinion

Miami Children's Hospital pediatrician Dr. Amanda Porro, M.D administers a measles vaccination to Sophie Barquin, 4, as her mother Gabrielle Barquin holds her during a visit to the Miami Children's Hospital on Jan. 28, in Miami, Florida. A recent outbreak of measles has some doctors encouraging vaccination as the best way to prevent measles and its spread.

As if we don't have enough to worry about, measles epidemics are on the rise. This is not the result of bad hygiene, or a breakdown in the healthcare system, but from parents intentionally choosing not to vaccinate their children. Why would a parent not want his child protected from infectious diseases? Some feel vaccinations cause autism, while others see vaccinations as part of some government conspiracy. It brings to mind that old saw, "don't cut off your nose to spite your face." But it seems a lot of noses are being sliced over this issue.

Vaccination came about in the late 1790s when English doctor Edward Jenner sought a way to combat the horrifying and fatal scourge of small pox. Because he used a cow as part of his experiments he called his technique, vaccination, from the Latin word for cow. Vaccination proved extremely good at preventing disease. By the 20th century maladies such as small pox, polio, and measles had been effectively eradicated in the industrialized world. Until now, that is.

In a 1998 paper in the medical journal Lancet researcher Andrew Wakefield claimed that childhood inoculations were linked to autism. The autism support community, already suspicious of vaccines, used this article as a clarion call to stop immunizing children. That call was heeded by a number of affluent, middle-class parents, and the modern anti-vaccination movement took off. Unfortunately, Wakefield's work was not embraced by the medical field. They quickly pointed out a number of disturbing flaws in his methodology and results. The Lancet retracted his paper and he lost his license. A number of follow-up studies have shown that vaccinations have no connection to autism. But that only spurred anti-vaccination proponents to greater effort.

Along with the much discussed outbreak of measles at Disneyland in California, there have been other less publicized outbreaks across the country linked to the refusal to vaccinate. If we continue this way, measles will only be the first. Whooping cough has begun to reappear, and others will likely follow as the nation's 'herd immunity' decreases. You may have the right to not vaccinate your child, but do you have the right to put your neighbor's child at risk? Deciding not to have your children inoculated may be a lifestyle choice, but it's a poor one.

By way of comparison, measles is more contagious than the dreaded Ebola. Recently pundits fumed because they said the government hadn't done enough to stop the spread of that disease. People cheered when travelers coming to America from Africa were forcibly quarantined for fear they might have Ebola. Yet the idea of inoculating children against measles equates to an outrageous intrusion by Big Brother.

Every year almost 800,000 children worldwide die from measles, small pox, and other diseases because they are not vaccinated. The United Nations works to try to get vaccinations to people in Third World countries where disease ravages the population. Desperate parents walk miles to get the chance of having their kids vaccinated. They understand the importance of this.

Those kinds of numbers haven't hit the United States because we have -- or at least had -- very high rates of immunization. That could change. Elected officials and social commentators should be at the forefront of promoting universal immunization, as they once were, not denigrating it as some do now. This is not a political issue; it's a public health issue.

Vaccinations are one of the great advances in medical history. Government programs promoting public health have benefited us all, reduced the infant mortality rate, and saved us huge amounts of suffering and tax dollars. Don't throw that away because of flawed belief, or fear, or simple selfishness. Why not keep your nose instead of cutting it off? All of our faces will thank you for it.

Brian Regal teaches the history of science, technology, and medicine at Kean University.