As we hypothesized, gender differences were found for the three sexting subdimensions (i.e., receiving, sending, and posting sexts): Males were more likely to send, receive, and post sexts. These results may be explained by referring to the Italian cultural context. Previous studies found that Italian male adolescents are more likely than females to report that they find erotic materials enjoyable and arousing, and reported stronger positive expectancies about receiving sexts (Eurispes & Telefono Azzurro 2012).
Consistent with previous studies exploring the correlations between risky behaviors and sexting (Dir et al. 2013a), our study provided information pertaining to the relationships between cyber pornography addiction, alcohol consumption, and sexting. Nevertheless, results from the moderation analysis suggested that the relationship between cyber pornography addiction and sexting is stronger in those who have a high alcohol consumption. Conversely, alcohol restraint could represent a protective factor against engaging in sexting even in the presence of high cyber pornography addiction. Therefore, we suggest that the tendency to reenact the contents viewed in cyber pornography sites appear to be facilitated by the disinhibition effect of alcohol consumption. To our knowledge, this hypothesis was never been tested before and is in need of support among different age groups and cultural contexts. However, our results suggest that cyber pornography is not a predictor of sexting per se, because its relationship with sexting becomes weak in those who have a lower alcohol consumption. Thus, these results could be explained by the presence of a factor underlying all assessed dimensions (i.e., cyber pornography, alcohol, and sexting): as suggested by Krueger et al. (2005), there could be a common ethiological pattern for externalizing behaviors that involves both antisocial behaviors, substance use, and personality traits. Future research should investigate the relationship between cyber pornography and sexting in line with this perspective. Furthermore, our study may have research implications beyond clinical implications. Results could shed light on how to investigate sexting predictors and suggest that researchers should be careful in studying sexting antecedents. There seem to be other possible factors that condition (moderate) the relationship between these antecedents and sexting. In fact, the literature had shown inconsistent results regarding the link between cyber pornography and sexting (Crimmins and Seigfried-Spellar 2014; Vandenbosch et al. 2015; Van Ouytsel et al. 2014). To our knowledge, this is one of the first studies that investigated not only the linear relationships but also the interaction effects between the antecedents of sexting. This could also help to precisely identify factors that lead to sexting and to project more effective prevention programs.
There were important limitations to our study. First, we used a convenience sample and we did not consider how social class or ethnicity might interrelate with sexting behaviors. Second, the study was conducted in Italy, and these findings may not apply to adolescents living in other countries. Third, there was a possible effect of social desirability, as there always is when data are collected using self-report questionnaires. Additionally, using qualitative methods to further analyze the ways in which sexting behavior is placed in a context of adolescent impulsivity, sensation seeking, and problematic alcohol and drug abuse would also be of interest. Moreover, it would be useful to study the direct and indirect effects of sexting on adolescents’ development and provide suggestions for future policies and research.
Even if sexting could be considered a normal expression of sexuality among adolescents (Dake et al. 2012; Levine 2013), some characteristics of sexting—such as the mass dissemination of explicit images, cyberbullying, social humiliation, psychological distress, and legal issues—require significant preventive interventions through law enforcement and education for adolescents, parents, and educators, as previously suggested by Martinez-Prather and Vandiver (2014). In particular, it is critical to understand the beliefs, attitudes, and risky behaviors associated with sexting and, consequently, to provide adequate sexual education to adolescents. In Italy, negative attitudes toward sexual education persist; hence, prevention programs should be developed to deconstruct stereotypes regarding sexuality during adolescence. It is our hope that this paper will contribute to the scientific understanding and promotion of psychological well-being for adolescents.