Second, interleaved study requires students to keep active their knowledge of several procedures or concepts simultaneously, which might result in greater cognitive load [49–52] and change their perceptions of mastery, negatively impacting their study decisions [53]. These potential drawbacks of interleaved study could have a more serious effect when compounded by the increased cognitive demands of self-regulated study described above. By contrast, in blocked study, the task is not as demanding on cognitive resources because students can focus on one concept at a time. Thus, self-regulated conditions could exacerbate a potential weakness of interleaved study. In sum, self-regulated study could mitigate problems associated with blocked study, aggravate problems associated with interleaved study, or both.
In recent years, there has been an increasing interest on how the sequence of study can affect learning [7–9,13,14,37,54] in no small part because students are increasingly in charge of organizing their own study, and may fail to adopt the optimal sequence of study [3] with potential negative consequences. In this context, we believe the current research raises two important points.
First, it is important to consider the possibility that apparently inefficient study decisions might be beneficial if the student is the one making them. Despite the large literature showing an advantage for interleaved study in inductive category learning, the present work points to possible advantages for blocked study. Importantly, the benefits of blocked study were only found when students actively chose it themselves rather than having it imposed on them. We believe more work is needed to investigate how the best sequence may depend on the study situation, and the importance of self-regulation in the context of studying decisions.
Secondly, from a methodological point of view, this experiment can serve as a model for carefully controlled research in naturalistic contexts and pedagogically relevant issues. The effect of self-regulation described here, albeit small, was found in the context of students’ real study experience, very different from the common laboratory study. Although this methodology might present lower measurement resolution (only four test questions) and increased measurement noise resulting in decreased power compared to the usual laboratory study, it has considerable ecological validity. Moreover, in contrast to many classroom studies, online distribution of the tutorial allowed considerable control over the intervention and precise recording of the students’ behavior for inclusion in subsequent analyses. We believe that similar in vivo yet individually-controlled studies of learning in educational contexts [41,55] represent a major potential growth area for cognitive science.