As is the case with any study, the present investigation has several limitations. First, the present study uses a rather brief (eight-item) measure of neuroticism. A longer, more detailed measure that is designed to specifically measure neuroticism, or perhaps multiple measures with convergent validity, may be more appropriate for future studies on the relation between neuroticism, mind-wandering, and executive control. Second, the mind-wandering construct was drawn from rates of mind-wandering during the attention control tasks. In the future, these measurements can be combined with other indices of mind-wandering (e.g., diaries, experience sampling) to corroborate the findings of mind-wandering in the lab. Third, the present study does not measure other closely related aspects of neuroticism such as negative affect, mood, anxiety, and worry, nor does it ask participants to report any recent life events that may impact their cognitive performance and ability to resist mind-wandering beyond their personality traits. For example, if an individual recently experienced a personal crisis or has a stressful upcoming event in the near future, they may be more prone to mind-wandering about such an important personal event, which could be totally independent of their stable personality traits. Future work should measure both state (i.e., temporally specific) factors and trait factors that can contribute to the relationship between emotion and cognition. Finally, the tasks inherently carry a level of explicit and implicit feedback that may be unintentionally inducing test anxiety. This procedure-induced test anxiety could be affecting task performance, especially for those individuals high in neuroticism and thus more predisposed to experiencing anxious thoughts and feelings.
We should also note that a previous investigation by one of the authors (Unsworth et al., 2009) found a null correlation between neuroticism and one measure of working memory (operation span) and neuroticism and attention control/inhibition. There are several possible reasons for the discrepancies in these findings. The first is that the personality measurement in Unsworth et al. (2009) was the 280- item Revised NEO Personality Inventory (Costa & McCrae, 1992), and the present study used a 44-item Big Five Inventory. Although the measures of neuroticism in the two measures are moderately to highly correlated, they are not identical (Rammstedt & John, 2007). So it is possible that the subtle differences in these two measures can explain the discrepant findings. We acknowledged earlier that one element of the present study is the use of only one measure of neuroticism, so it is possible that these measures may be tapping slightly different aspects of neuroticism that have different relationships with mind-wandering and executive control. Another possibility is a difference in procedure. In Unsworth et al.’s (2009) study, participants completed laboratory measures of working memory, vigilance, fluid intelligence, fluency, and response inhibition in one laboratory session and completed a battery of personality questionnaires in a separate session. In the current study, participants completed the Big Five Inventory immediately following the working memory and attention control measures. It is possible that the procedure, especially considering the discussion of possible testing anxiety mentioned earlier, may have altered which neuroticism items individuals tended to endorse. Follow-up research should investigate this possibility, as well as use multiple measures in an attempt to measure neuroticism with perhaps more convergent validity. Finally, there could simply be differences in samples between the two studies.
Even with these limitations, the present study makes several novel findings in the field of mind-wandering and human cognition. Tests of the Control Failure × Concerns model of mind-wandering have largely focused on individual differences in executive control and their relationships to mind-wandering rates. The personal concerns piece has received considerably less attention, especially from an individual differences perspective. Recent experimental evidence (e.g., Banks et al., 2015; McVay & Kane, 2013) has suggested that priming personal concerns, and perhaps especially negative ones, leads to more mind-wandering, and this effect seems to be particularly pronounced among individuals with high stress reactivity. Because of the large sample and the ability to use structural equation modelling to partial common and unique variance among executive control, neuroticism, and mind wandering, we were able to further delineate sources of mind-wandering. Therefore, we have given further credence and clarification to the Control Failure × Concerns model of mind-wandering and opened doors for future research.
Mind-wandering relates to a variety of important areas of human functioning, including basic cognition, higher order cognition, daily success, happiness, and even certain types of psychopathology. Therefore, a more complete understanding of mind-wandering will aid our ability to understand how and when it occurs, when it is detrimental and when it may help, and how it can inform models of human cognition and emotion. We set out to test the Control Failure × Concerns model of mind-wandering by measuring individual differences in neuroticism, which should measure an individual’s tendency to entertain personal concerns, or similarly the relative salience of personal concern to individuals. By finding relationships among neuroticism, executive control, and mind-wandering, the present study brings new converging evidence for the Control Failure × Concerns model and hopefully opens the door to future areas of research. These results can inform neuroscientific investigations of constructs like psychopathology, deficient attention control, mind-wandering, and the relationships among them, tying together the fields of clinical psychology, cognitive psychology, affective neuroscience, and cognitive neuroscience to give us a more complete understanding of the human cognitive and emotional systems, as well as the complex ways in which they interact.