Third, at Adams, and at almost all positive outlier schools in LSES-III, there was a prominent display of the names of academic honor roll students in a heavily traveled hall near the principal's office. Academic excellence was the single most important goal of the school. Of central interest in LSES-III, the school's commitment to academics had been translated into in-class action. The rate of interactive instructing at Adams nearly doubled that at Fillmore. Similarly, time spent in organizing and off-task activities was a third lower at Adams.
If a rational, data based school improvement literature is to develop, it will require information from both the school-effectiveness and teacher-effectiveness literatures. Good and Brophy (1986) have argued for research which nests classroom interaction studies within larger school effectiveness studies. Such research can provide a bridge between the school effectiveness and more devel­ oped teacher effectiveness literatures. LSES-III is one such study. We are just beginning the analysis of data from this phase, yet the first preliminary analyses presented here indicate that the method offers promise. If further analyses confirm our findings in the 16 school database, and if other studies replicate.
LSES-III findings, then connections will have been built between the "process" of the two fields, and substantial progress will have been made toward the development of a more unified model of effective schooling.
Given that practice cannot wait on theory development, practical issues should be addressed. To date, the quasi-experimental teacher effectiveness literature is much more developed than similar efforts in the school effectiveness field. The preliminary findings of LSES-III suggest that school "culture" and other school level variables are translated in effective schools into specific, measurable teacher behaviors. In several studies (e.g., Anderson, Evertson, and Brophy, 1979; Good and Grouws, 1979; Stallings, 1980) these teacher behaviors have proven alterable through extensive, specific, behaviorally based workshops series. Future school improvement studies might find added strength in in-depth efforts to change patterns of classroom interaction.