By reflecting on the research methods that have been used in collaboration with the Oxford House organization, the present article outlines the many ways to empirically evaluate and investigate recovery residences. Until recently, research on substance abuse has largely focused on formal treatment and the genetics and neuroscience of addiction. Although studying these individual factors is important for addiction research, investigating environmental factors and how they interact with individuals is equally fundamental for recovery research. In fact, the Obama administration, through the National Drug Control Strategy (2013), has emphasized the importance of working with stakeholders to develop services that support sustained recovery, such as recovery residences and other peer support services that can be provided by individuals who themselves are in recovery. Further research on the role of housing and recovery residences in substance abuse will enable policy makers and practitioners to better understand the legitimacy and importance of recovery residences and mutually supportive recovery organizations (Jason et al., 2013).
This article has several limitations. Current or former members of the DePaul University research team conducted all of the studies included in this article, because other research teams have not yet conducted empirical evaluations of Oxford House. Although there are strengths associated with having a pluralistic research program, there are also many benefits associated with having findings replicated by other research teams. Thus, as with all scientific endeavors, it is of importance for other research teams to replicate the findings summarized in this article. Another limitation may be that the researchers conducting the current review are also associated with the aforementioned research team. As demonstrated in research on psychotherapy, researcher allegiance may introduce a source of bias in treatment outcome evaluations. However, the aims of the current review were not focused on evaluating the effectiveness of Oxford House as a treatment, but rather evaluating the research processes that have contributed to existing knowledge on Oxford Houses in hopes of stimulating further research on recovery residences.
There are certainly more questions about recovery residences that need to be examined. For example, there is a need for more studies evaluating the effectiveness of Oxford House versus other types of recovery homes. Recovery residences have been classified into “Levels of Support” by the National Association of Recovery Residences based on the intensity and duration of support that are offered to the residents (Jason et al., 2013), where a “Level 1” classification reflects minimal structure and supervision (such as an Oxford House) and a “Level 4” classification reflects a highly structured and staffed program.
There is a need for research that examines how many recovery residences exist in the United States, the geographic distributions of these residences, the factors that promote sustainability of these residences, the physical and social characteristics of residences, their long-term effects for residents, and the neighborhood’s effects on the residence and vice versa. Additionally, research is needed on which level of support is most appropriate for specific individuals. There is also a need for comparisons of long-term residential treatment programs, shelters, safe havens, transitional housing, incarceration, and homelessness programs. We hope that the quantitative and qualitative study designs and data analysis techniques delineated here can provide a framework for researchers to answer these critical questions in future research with recovery residences.