The observed differences in judgments are stable if subtle. In Experiment 1, the space bounded by two vertices was perceived as being roughly 10% longer than the same space in the side condition at the physical distance of 32 mm. The difference was smaller in Experiments 2, 3, and 4. Importantly, the difference decreased in line with the increasingly stricter constraints, adding further support to our hypothesis. To illustrate, the difference caused by the change in aspect of a single equilateral triangle (Experiments 2 and 3) was about 5%—about half the difference observed in Experiment 1. The difference was even smaller in Experiment 4 due to change in the physical properties of the stimulus. Yet the pattern of effects is consistent and reliable, and, as such, we believe it is worthy of further investigation. It should also be noted that the effects of local distortion were observed in judgment variability scores. Generally, the most salient effect was the inverse U profile, consistent with the increase in uncertainty halfway between the figure and the centre. Although no conclusions could be reached without further testing, the finding suggests that a parametric model of visual space must provide a thorough account of the effects of spatial distortion on response variability.
Our results are consistent with Watson’s (1978) proposal that visual space can be locally non-Euclidean. Watson proposed that the geometry of visual space changes locally depending on the relationship between the objects that occupy it. He hypothesized that lines and curves in visual space introduce a “force field”, which distorts perceived geometrical relations with regard to the Euclidean geometry. He contrasted two approaches to this “force-field” theory. The first assumes that perceptual distortions affect objects but not the underlying visual space, which remains Euclidean (p. 142). Second, and following the failure of this model to account for visual illusions, Watson suggested that objects themselves affect the basic geometry of visual space, resulting in changes in distance between objects or lines. Using the assumptions of Riemannian geometry, he demonstrated that some well-known visual illusions (e.g. Müller-Lyer and Poggendorff illusions) can be explained by treating visual space as a smooth elastic manifold, which is distorted by stimuli. In this differential-geometric framework, the effects of spatial distortion decrease with the distance from a line or figure, and contractions in one portion of the field must be compensated by expansion in another (p. 146).
In this context, our results may reflect dynamic interactions, producing a gradient landscape that is not directly perceivable but has permanent and stable effects on perception (e.g. Aksentijevic, Elliott, & Barber, 2001). This landscape consists of attractors (troughs or basins), flat regions, and transition regions (hyperbolic paraboloids or saddles) that are created by two figures when these are sufficiently close. Critically, the configuration of the landscape changes dynamically with the change in size, relative position, and number of objects. The degree of distortion created by a figure depends on its size and shape. Larger figures affect more of the surrounding space, and different features contribute differently to the local differences in distortion. These two factors interact to produce different grouping solutions.
In conclusion, we report four experiments that demonstrate for the first time the effects of spatial distortions created by simple geometrical figures (triangles and ellipses) on distance judgments. Our findings indicate that different aspects of a figure create different local gradients in the surrounding space. They support the idea that, at least in two dimensions, visual space is locally nonlinear and that its extrinsic geometry (Fernandez & Farell, 2009) is affected by the mass and shape of figures embedded in it. Future research will investigate the interaction between mass and shape, effects of saddle asymmetries imposed by non-identical figures, as well the effects of spatial distortions on the propagation of attention. Incidentally, there is evidence that the distortions in a number of illusions (Zöllner, Poggendorff, and Müller-Lyer) critically depend on the presence of corner junctions (e.g. Day, 2006) and that errors on a Müller-Lyer shaft bisection task increase close to the angles (Prebedon, 2000). Thus, one of the future directions of this research will be to systematically relate the strength of this illusion to the degree of field distortion.