The current study’s sample size was far greater than previous screener studies (Farvolden et al., 2003; Gega, Kenwright, Mataix-Cols, Cameron, & Marks, 2005; Storch et al., 2007). Unlike other studies that solely used undergraduate participants (Coles et al., 2007), the current study carefully selected established OCD websites and consumer conferences for individuals with OCD. Given that consumer conferences require time and payment by attendees, it is unlikely that individuals who attended and participated in the study were malingering. Where as other screening tools have been lengthy or difficult to read (Donker et al., 2009), the WHOS is brief, lowering participant burden. This brief screening tool may help screening for clinical purposes or research study completion and not “rule out” those without clinical levels of OCD, saving the screeners time and effort. The ease of administration, scoring, and interpretation, gives the WHOS an advantage over other screening tools that require arduous scoring and professional interpretation (Farvolden et al., 2003). In addition, the WHOS is free and readily accessible to clinicians and researchers, whereas many other screening tools are only available by purchase.
The WHOS is a useful measure when a clinician needs a brief screening or a researcher wants to reduce participant burden and in-person clinical diagnoses are not available. Given that the Internet has become a widespread venue for conducting research, it is imperative that a valid screener is used to determine OCD study inclusion and exclusion. We believe the WHOS has the potential to facilitate future research on OCD and improve the validity of online research, especially if future studies can validate how it compares with structured clinical interviews.
Despite the diversity in recruitment strategy and large sample size, there were limitations with the current study. The study lacked participant diversity in race/ethnicity, and evidence for differences in OCD severity across these groups is growing (Williams, Elstein, Buckner, Abelson, & Himle, 2012). The study would also benefit from conducting the screening with participants who are less familiar with OCD, such as university students or a clinic that treats an array of disorders. In doing so, the ability of the screener to detect OCD in a general population is likely to be strengthened.
Test–retest reliability and correlation to diagnoses established by structured clinical interviews were also absent from the present study. To improve validity, future research should include a greater number of measures taken across all groups. The screening should also be conducted in more diverse venues of treatment-seeking populations (e.g., standard outpatient settings, non-OCD-specific clinics) as well as with participants from the general population and in comparison with a healthy control group. Although the WHOS has promise, we hope this initial investigation will spark more research to establish its validity and utility.