A third limitation involved the research design. More specifically, the research design was a case study. The intact soccer team served as the experimental group and no control group was included. Though multiple sources of data point to the athletes’ use of the UNIFORM skills at posttest and follow-up, the absence of a control group makes it difficult to say with certainty that the experimental group’s positive results were a result of them being taught the UNIFORM curriculum and not some other factors. However, the use of a control group in an applied intervention setting is not always appropriate or feasible. As noted by Anderson, Miles, Mahoney, and Robinson (2002), “it is impractical to offer a service to one group of athletes and deliberately withhold the service from another group” (p. 437). This was the view of the AD whose mission was to increase student-athlete participation, engagement, achievement, and retention. He felt strongly that if two teams were to be included in the study, that they should both be taught the curriculum. However, due to timing, scheduling conflicts, the length of the curriculum (i.e., 12 weeks), and available resources only one team could be included. As such, the soccer team was a single case, and though the results are positive, they should be interpreted with caution.
Despite its limitations, the current study makes a contribution to the literature on the development of sport psychology and life skills in adolescent athletes. This has been identified as an important area of investigation with researchers studying life skills development of athletes via applied sport psychology interventions as well as the perceptions of coaches, administrators, parents, and the athletes themselves (Camiré et al., 2013; Sharp et al., 2013; Sheard & Golby, 2006; Trottier & Robitaille, 2014). It appears that a curriculum like the Psychological UNIFORM can be used to successfully teach sport psychology skills to adolescent athletes. Through multiple sport-themed, classroom-based activities and a physically active component, the athlete participants used several sport psychology skills according to the data collected during, and immediately following the curriculum period.
Few studies have measured athletes’ retention and use of sport psychology or life skills at a follow-up period after the intervention has been completed. In an effort to address this gap, data were collected at the 4-week follow-up point in the current study. The instrument used to measure the majority of the psychological skills taught within the UNIFORM curriculum was the TOPS (Thomas et al., 1999). This questionnaire is widely used to measure athletes’ application of sport psychology skills in practice and competition. At the time of the 4-week follow-up, the soccer season had ended. However, analysis showed some significant findings, even at a time when many athletes had no opportunity to use the skills in a practice or competition setting. Data from the EIS support these positive outcomes and are encouraging; they suggest that athletes who were finished soccer, but involved in other sports (e.g., lacrosse) maintained their sport psychology skills, and also that the athletes applied the skills to other areas of their life such as school, and when dealing with relationships. Thus, the current study makes a contribution by advancing the knowledge related to teaching sport psychology and life skills in the high school athletic setting in meaningful ways such that athletes use the skills during, but more importantly after, the conclusion of the intervention program. Regardless, researchers should consider using longer follow-up periods to determine the extent to which the athletes can retain their skills over greater time periods following the completion of the intervention program.
Given adolescent interest in sport and the accessibility to athletes, the high school site appears to be a fertile context in which to teach sport psychology and life skills to adolescent athletes (Camiré, 2014). If integrated into training sessions, the GPF activities have the potential to be more authentic and engaging. As noted by a high performance coach, “interactive” activities were most effective in helping athletes learn life skills (Hardcastle et al., 2015). Regardless of the teaching organization athletes can and should be taught to use sport psychology and life skills. Though there is not one “correct” way to do this, with its multimethod approach and sport-themed activities, the Psychological UNIFORM appears to be an effective vehicle to accomplish this task.