Participants in the current study outlined a range of approaches which underpin their applied work, and several of these can be seen to fall within the frameworks and models proposed by Hill (2001) and Poczwardowski and colleagues (2004). What remains unclear is how a practitioner should integrate different approaches in a complementary, considered, faithful manner. It seems that sport psychology could perhaps learn from other areas of psychology about how to truly integrate different approaches: “First, there needs to be in-depth learning of the substance of two or more theoretical traditions, and second, there must be an orienting framework for theoretical and/or technical assimilation and accommodation” (Boswell, 2016, p.5). Consideration must also be given to the philosophical underpinnings of MI, and how these may or may not be congruent with different action-orientated, directive, or instruction-based interventions which may be common in applied sport psychology. Nevertheless, it has been suggested that relational techniques from the MI approach can be used alongside content-based interventions, irrespective of theoretical stance (Hardcastle et al., 2017; Hardcastle, 2016).
This study investigated the level of understanding and use of MI with applied sport psychologists who are not experts in the MI approach, and identified some explicit understanding and use, and much implicit use of MI. It is now pertinent for future research to investigate this area with practitioners who are experts in MI and are working in sport. This will begin the process of identifying best practice around applying MI in sport as part of an integrated approach, and as an intervention in its own right, which might then inform the training curricula of students and neophyte practitioners in this discipline. Participants in the current study cited a lack of research on this approach in this domain, and a lack of sport-specific examples for practitioners, as barriers to learning and using MI in sport psychology. As such, it will be important for future research to fill these knowledge gaps. Based on existing literature highlighting the important role of relationships between practitioner and athletes (e.g., Sharp et al., 2015), one avenue for future research could be in the development of a sport-specific measure of the therapeutic alliance, as an ongoing assessment of the strength of the consultancy relationship from the perspective of the client. Another avenue worthy of exploration would be adaptions to MI for working with different sporting populations, including groups (teams) and adolescents. Finally, an exploration of integrating MI with different action-orientated approaches in sport psychology (e.g., rational emotive behavior therapy (Wood, Barker, & Turner, 2017); solution focused therapy (Hoigaard & Johansen, 2004)) may further enhance professional practice.
Although this study has generated novel information about the role of MI in applied sport psychology, there are some limitations which must be acknowledged. The practitioners sampled are well established in the discipline and are currently working at the elite level. Therefore, their experiences are perhaps not representative of those who are just beginning their careers, regarding the level of athlete that they work with, and the nature of the work itself. At the elite level, practitioners are perhaps less likely to encounter disengagement and resistance, for example. When neophytes are beginning the training process, they may experience increased levels of ambivalence or disengagement, given that they are unlikely to be working with elite athletes. In addition, the participants sampled in the current study are working primarily with athletes individually. Again this is perhaps not representative of the neophyte’s experience, where they are potentially delivering workshops and seminars to teams or groups of athletes and coaches. Both of these examples support the need to explore MI in sport psychology when working with resistant athletes and for adaptations for working with teams.
This study has begun the process of exploring the application of MI in sport psychology, and identified the need to clarify the system of integrating different approaches. It is proposed here that this counseling approach can underpin the delivery of sport psychology’s dominant action-orientated interventions, and enhance the practitioner-athlete relationship. Discrepancy between responses related to explicit and implicit use of MI indicates that the MI approach has more to offer applied sport psychology—to the training curricula for students of the discipline, and ongoing professional development of neophyte practitioners and established practitioners alike.