Finally, in contrast to these two views, which both assume that it is the timing of the events that drives the observed spacing effect, we must consider an alternative view that this effect is instead driven by differences in contextual variation between massed and spaced exposures. This account proposes that spacing benefits can be explained by an encoding variability mechanism (Maddox, 2016). According to Mensink and Raaijmakers (1989) and Raaijmakers (2003), the general context surrounding a stimulus naturally fluctuates over time and this context is encoded with each presentation of a stimulus. As the temporal spacing of repetitions gets longer, the natural context is more likely to vary and that variation between stimulus encodings increases the likelihood/ magnitude of learning from that stimulus. Hence, this account would suggest that the spacing benefit arises due to the increase in different encoded contexts for the spaced word-meaning exposures, which would subsequently make the meaning more available. This model is akin to the concept of contextual diversity (Adelman, Brown, & Quesada, 2006; van Heuven, Mandera, Keuleers, & Brysbaert, 2014), which has been shown to affect word processing (lexical decision performance is better explained by contextual diversity across word occurrences than by just the frequency of occurrence). Similarly, the “One Sense per Discourse” principle (e.g., Gale et al., 1992) is based on the finding that an ambiguous word encountered multiple times within a discourse is highly likely to be used in the same meaning across those encounters, and suggests that an interlocutor would treat one subordinate repetition and three subordinate repetitions within the same discourse/paragraph as equivalents because they both provide one overall piece of evidence about one meaning (as opposed to multiple separate/spaced pieces of evidence of that one meaning).
However, we believe that this encoding variability/contextual diversity/“One Sense per Discourse” type of account is less likely to provide an explanation for the current data. Although this account can explain the observed boost for spaced presentations compared to massed presentations, it cannot explain why three massed repetitions did not boost priming compared to one repetition, given that in Experiments 2 and 3 its two additional repetitions were presented in three separate sentences that did not link together into a coherent discourse. Even in the massed condition, these three sentences proRETUNING OF LEXICAL-SEMANTIC REPRESENTATIONS 17 vided different contextual information and were distinctly presented in separate pieces of discourse (each sentence was followed by the judgment of relatedness of a probe word, and the sentences were unrelated) so this should provide enough contextual variation to see an increase in priming (compared with one repetition) even for the massed condition and even though the overall situational context did not vary a great deal. Yet, the massed condition provided no additional priming compared to one repetition, despite its two additional and distinct sentences/discourses of varying contextual information. While contextual variation accounts consider the general surrounding context rather than context within the sentence, it seems unlikely that additional sentential context would not boost priming if context were such an integral factor in priming. This makes the contextual variation account an unlikely explanation for the present findings. Clearly, it seems that there are several possible mechanisms underlying the spacing benefit but, as aforementioned, this requires further research to disentangle.
Importantly, the observed lack of benefit for multiple massed repetitions is likely to be advantageous from a communication point of view, as these instances are not always representative of the broader word usage. For instance, a conversation with a tree surgeon might involve the tree meaning of ‘bark’ multiple times in a short passage/ time-frame of perhaps minutes. If meaning preferences updated cumulatively with each of these repetitions, then this conversation alone would have a disproportionately large effect on meaning preferences for ‘bark’ compared with hearing the same number of ‘tree bark’ repetitions over a longer time-frame of perhaps days or weeks. In this case, the overly sensitive change in meaning preferences would be inefficient. In contrast, if additional word-meaning repetitions only alter representations when sufficiently spaced, lexical-semantic representations might still be somewhat sensitive to the listener’s immediate environment but would primarily reflect the listener’s long-term, temporally distributed (spaced) experience with word usage, which are more likely to accurately predict how these words are used in the future. Under this account, exposure to multiple instances of a word used with its low-frequency meaning would produce a smaller biasing effect on its lexical-semantic representation, and therefore this representation would more likely generalise to future encounters.
Adults’ lexical-semantic representations are updated dynamically in response to ongoing experience to reflect the most likely meaning of words. The present studies investigated the changes that occur as a consequence of exposure to the meanings of an ambiguous word. The results replicate the word-meaning priming effect and go further in showing that multiple subordinate repetitions provided an additional boost to priming compared with one repetition when these encounters were spaced, although this boost was eliminated when multiple repetitions were massed, at least in a word association test. Moreover, one repetition of the dominant meaning reduced, but did not eliminate, the effect of prior subordinate meaning priming. These results indicate that the experience-based changes to lexical-semantic representations are not solely based on the most recent encounter with a word meaning, nor does the effect occur with the same magnitude across repeated encounters. Rather, word-meaning interpretation appears to reflect the accumulation of recent experiences with wordmeanings, where the temporal spacing of multiple encounters is key to producing additional learning effects. This seems to provide a balance among the influences of word usage patterns across a range of timescales, such that listeners can dynamically retune and update their lexical-semantic representations in response to recent experience while maintaining their longer-term knowledge of word-meaning dominance.