Early reports have shown a relationship between patient and parental acceptance of hydroxyurea and their perceptions of SCD severity [20, 24–26], which may indirectly influence hydroxyurea adherence. Parents who perceived their children as having a milder form of SCD were less willing to accept the risk of hydroxyurea side effects, particularly in relation to birth defects and cancer risk [20, 24–26]. In contrast, parents of patients with severe SCD sought more information about hydroxyurea and were more accepting of its use as a preventive strategy [24, 25]. Different factors have been proposed to contribute to the decision of starting hydroxyurea in patients with SCD, including patients’ and parental perceptions. In a single-institution study, the majority of parents and patients were in favor of using hydroxyurea, which was perceived as safe and effective with balanced risks and benefits, compared to chronic transfusions and stem cell transplantation [49]. In our study, greater hydroxyurea adherence by patient self-report and higher MCV and HbF levels was associated with perceptions of greater treatment benefit from hydroxyurea, although the direction of any cause and effect relationship is not clear.
We also sought to examine patients’ perceptions of SCD and hydroxyurea in relation to their domains of HRQOL. Similar to children with other chronic conditions, children with SCD have poor HRQOL domain scores [3, 34, 36, 50]. In our cohort, patients’ perceptions correlated with different HRQOL domain scores. Patients with more negative perceptions of SCD-related consequences, concerns, and emotional response, or with less perceived benefits of hydroxyurea, reported worse fatigue, pain, anxiety, and depression scores. These relationships suggest an association between worse perceptions of SCD and/or hydroxyurea, and poor HRQOL domain scores. Nevertheless, given the nature of our cross-sectional study, we cannot determine the direction of the relationship, namely whether poor HRQOL leads to worse perceptions or that worse perceptions leads to poor HRQOL domain scores. Consistent with our results, O’Donovan et al. have shown that, in a cohort of patients with congenital heart disease, illness perceptions were also predictive of different HRQOL domains and psychological outcomes, including depression and anxiety [51].
Some limitations of our study warrant discussion. First, our study was at a single institution and data were collected from a convenience sample of SCD patients, which could limit the generalizability of our results. However, our study helped to generate further hypotheses that could inform a larger prospective study. Second, the cross-sectional design of the study limited our ability to examine the changes in patients’ perceptions, hydroxyurea adherence, and different domains of HRQOL over time. Third, we limited our study population to AYA population with a relatively narrow age range (12–22 years old). However, we focused on AYA because they represent a specific age group when patients start to take responsibility of their illness and be in charge of taking their hydroxyurea on their own, which make them at higher risk for low hydroxyurea adherence. Fourth, we evaluated SCD-related events (e.g. ED visits and hospitalizations) at our institution only and it is possible that SCD-related events elsewhere could have been missed. Finally, we used B-IPQ and ©MMAS-8 to evaluate patients’ perceptions of SCD and hydroxyurea adherence, respectively, and both have not been validated for adolescents or in SCD. To address this, we conducted pre-testing to ensure participants’ comprehension of different items of the B-IPQ and ©MMAS-8. Both measures have been used in published studies that included patients with SCD and/or other chronic conditions [14, 27, 47, 52–54], and in particular, the B-IPQ has been used in studies with patients as young as 8 years of age [27]. In addition, objective laboratory data supported patients’ perceptions and adherence levels by self-report using B-IPQ and ©MMAS-8.
Perceptions of disease and treatment amongst AYA with SCD correlated with subjective and objective adherence measures, HRQOL domain scores and number of hospitalizations. Our findings enhance our understanding of patients’ perceptions of SCD and hydroxyurea and suggest that hydroxyurea adherence is a multifactorial process. Understanding patients’ perspectives could support efforts to overcome adherence and utilization barriers. [55, 56] Given the fact that hydroxyurea adherence is a dynamic and multi-factorial process, changes in patients’ perceptions of hydroxyurea and how it helps them maintain control of their illness could serve as surrogate markers for early changes in hydroxyurea adherence over time. Therefore, our results suggest that a longitudinal prospective assessment of patients’ perceptions may reveal modifiable factors associated with early changes in hydroxyurea adherence and HRQOL over time. Routine assessment of patients’ perceptions of hydroxyurea and SCD, adherence to hydroxyurea, and HRQOL in SCD outpatient settings should be considered using different platforms. Given the wide access to technology [21, 57, 58], web- or mobile-based platforms could be utilized to allow the completion of different assessments more frequently, and in-person or remotely in different settings.