Many Hindu populations, particularly in lower-income communities, attribute mental illness to karma (destiny) and choose not to seek professional help as they have accepted their condition as fate, or that nazar (the evil eye) causes cognitive dysfunction through supernatural causes (Juthani 2001; Betty 2005). Both patients and caregivers in these communities tend to seek treatments that align with their own beliefs, for example, spiritual healers, instead of visiting medical doctors (Dwyer 2003). Given India’s high rate of mental health issues coupled with its dearth of mental health providers, low-income Hindu communities stand to be even more impacted by mental health issues. However, given the significant emphasis on the community’s well-being over an individuals, this concept was utilized to link the positive psychology intervention with Hinduism: the teachers were from the community and the positive psychology interventions were taught in the community. Thus, a fundamental difference between these two perspectives (community by Hinduism and individual by positive psychology) was able to be utilized in an approach that sought to improve the well-being of the community’s youth overall.
As highlighted above, one unique approach taken by the Hero Lab intervention was to implement the initiative in front of the children’s homes, as opposed to in a school or building away from the community. This meant the curriculum was taught in the presence of family. This was crucial to the success of the curriculum because youth were learning to identify their signature strengths and build resilience, gratitude, hope, and purpose with their daily reality in the backdrop, not away from it. Students who graduated into the Stage 2 curriculum, equipped with the strengths, values and mindsets to contribute to their own happiness and their community’s happiness, are currently using design thinking to launch and lead three major projects: an English and storytelling program for local youth, a community cleanup campaign, and art classes for kids in the neighborhood to have a medium for self-expression. The success of the youth-organized capstone project and the ideas now being launched in the Stage 2 program are testaments to how teaching at-risk communities to not just learn, but to apply positive psychology, can reinforce teachings and contribute to greater social capital, neighbourhood cohesion, and deeper connections between self and community.
There are several limitations to this study. First, the skills and mindsets cultivated in the program need to be realized and applied over longer periods of time, and there is always a possibility given the volatile environments of these communities that strengths and values can be undone if they are not reinforced. However, this was taken into account by designing three stages of curricula for youth, such that once they finish one curriculum, they graduate into the next to continue building, but more importantly applying these softskills for well-being. The Stage 2 curriculum continues teaching positive psychology through design thinking and the Stage 3 curriculum focuses on building resilience in an entrepreneurial capacity by training local-level changemakers to launch their own social ventures. Second, this was a small sample size, and not a true representation of all the demographics and cultures of India. Thus, it would be useful in determining whether this curriculum can be implemented with the same success across slum communities with different types of adverse childhood experiences and diverse racial, religious, and economic makeups. To explore this, the Stage 1 curriculum is currently being taught in three other slums in Mumbai with a population ranging from 500 people to 700,000. A third limitation is understanding how this intervention translates into mental health outcomes in adulthood, which ongoing studies will explore. Fourth, it is unclear what part of the curriculum had the most impact on the participants, especially since it was implemented at the homes of the children. Regardless, the Hero Lab intervention as well as the location of the curriculum seemed to have played a significant role in improving specific elements of mental health in the participants. Finally, this was a small study (n = 50) and therefore needs a larger number of participants and greater community involvement in order to achieve substantial results, especially results that are sustained over time.
To date, positive psychology research has focused extensively on upper-middle class populations in developed economies. Though this trend is slowly shifting with non-profits and independent educators pioneering interventions in low-income schools and populations, there is a real and significant need for a more robust exploration in these settings. The intervention in Worli, Mumbai shows how positive psychology can be a low-cost, powerful tool to build the strengths, subjective values, and strong sense of meaning and purpose required to promote well-being and shield at-risk youth from depression. This study also reveals that when a positive psychology intervention is ingrained in community life, there is more buy-in from locals, and teachings can be applied directly to social impact and community upliftment. Further, long-term studies should explore how faith and positive psychology interventions correlate with reduced incidents of mental illness in low-income settings on at-risk children