In line with what was described in our study regarding the benefits of having technical tools that support daily life, it seems relevant to advocate for the availability of getting CGM advice in the early postpartum period. This would be to assist the mother’s adjustment to rapid changes in blood glucose levels, and especially to avoid hypoglycaemic episodes, as they interfere with taking care of the baby, including the child’s security. The women’s heightened awareness of the need for control, together with a reassuring effect of early alarms in case of a trend towards hypoglycaemia, might support these women in taking command of their diabetes. Fallon and Dunne (2015) claim that fundamental needs for women with type 1 diabetes are those related to safety and security. Since professional support is not available 24 h a day, particularly during early motherhood, technical devices can assist in continuously monitoring the unfamiliar and unpredictable blood glucose levels. This could be time and energy saving and might decrease the burden of daily self-management, potentially leading to better wellbeing and less exhaustion for these women. This is in line with what was found in a previous study by our research group (Berg & Sparud-Lundin, 2012; Berg et al., 2012).
Beyond technical devices for diabetes management, healthcare providers and peers could play a crucial role in supporting these women during early motherhood. The form of antenatal care provider has been found to influence the intention to breastfeed in women with diabetes (Finkelstein et al., 2013). For women in our study the frequent contacts with the antenatal care providers during pregnancy were abruptly interrupted when the child was born. Other healthcare professionals, either during the early postpartum care or after discharge, did not replace their supportive role. During a period of experiencing a more unfamiliar diabetes than ever before, and with reformulated incentives for taking care of themselves simultaneously with caring for the baby, most of the women in our study felt left with the responsibility. As the healthcare system did not support them sufficiently during early motherhood, they searched for support from other women in similar conditions. This is in line with the findings of Edwards et al. (2016), who made an extensive qualitative exploration of 200 electronic interactions between women with type 1 diabetes, from planning pregnancy, throughout pregnancy, and into early motherhood. The communication was retrieved from a free Internet-based counselling service and psychosocial support provided by a non-profit organization mainly for people with diabetes. Diabetes-specific distress was most frequent during “contemplation”, for example, when considering pregnancy, followed closely by the phase of motherhood. Depressed mood peaked during motherhood, and partners were not always able to understand their experiences. The authors conclude that contacts with other women who have experiences of pregnancy and motherhood seem to offer assurance not provided by their healthcare providers (Edwards et al., 2016). Although healthcare providers can assist in advising on how to make adjustments in insulin doses and so forth in order to balance the juggling of blood glucose, peers with diabetes are more likely to help prioritize the dual role in early motherhood.
Although the findings in this study resonate with other research, and by that demonstrate transferability, some limitations need to be acknowledged. First, the question of selection bias is always present in research studies. However, the effort to achieve a INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF QUALITATIVE STUDIES ON HEALTH AND WELL-BEING 7 varied sample of women with type 1 diabetes with respect to experiences both of being a first-time mother and of having given birth earlier increases external validity. Second, socioeconomic differences regarding educational levels, social welfare systems (for paid parental leave) and healthcare systems, as well as varying sociocultural attitudes towards breastfeeding, can have an impact on the transferability of the findings to other societies.
Having diabetes and being in the early period after giving birth to a child is demanding and challenging. The healthcare system needs to support these women, especially first-time mothers. After the extraordinary health care provided during pregnancy, it would be highly relevant and important to at least phase out the frequent support more gradually after the childbirth, not least because of the new challenges faced in relation to diabetes management in early motherhood. Therefore, we propose that a woman with type 1 diabetes should have planned and frequent contacts with her diabetes nurse directly after childbirth, preferably arranged beforehand. To secure the diabetes management support, telephone follow-up once or twice a week could be relevant during this extra-demanding period, as well as accessibility to technical support for facilitating daily self-management, if wanted. Moreover, providing these women with alternative sources for health information and peer support beyond the antenatal and diabetes care has the potential to improve their life situation during motherhood. This needs to be further investigated in upcoming studies.