Another contrast to human loss comes with honoring and memorialization of the loss. With human loss, many of the honoring activities are more expected (e.g., funeral, body care, obituaries). Of course, with companion animal loss, these options are less prescribed or expected. Participants from this study described their personal journeys to honoring and the associated benefits that resulted. The authors’ numerous anecdotal experiences support the true power associated with finding ways to honor. Some may struggle with not having expected ways of honoring as there are with human loss. Having discussions in advance acknowledging this and encouraging an “embracing” of the flexibility might be beneficial. As those grieving realize that the benefit of more flexibility is that the honoring can be more personalized and meaningful, they will “embrace” the unknown. Finding ways to memorialize the loss seemed particularly important for most research participants whether this was in a personal way or came through more formal ways initiated by veterinarians or family and friends. The absence of acknowledgement by loved ones appeared to detract the most from participants’ healing. As such, it is recommended that support persons already engaged in these honoring activities make efforts to include and invite other loved ones to participate.
The sample for the current study was a convenience sample recruited from a companion animal loss support group and an organization that assists with the memorialization of individuals’ former companion animals. As such, the participants may be more likely to value social support and memorialization processes than the general population of companion animal owners. The sample was also limited with regard to region, age, and race. The participants were recruited from two Midwestern cities, were mostly from older generations with a mean age of 61.83 years and were all Caucasian. More research is needed with a broader population in order to capture demographic differences and the range of coping methods found to be most helpful.
Additionally, the amount of time following the loss of the animal was not measured in this study. Future longitudinal research is needed to track the progression of grief and healing processes over time and to examine the impact of different types of positive social support on intensity and duration of grief following companion animal loss. This research could be used to enhance psychoeducational information available to veterinary and helping professionals and individuals experiencing companion animal loss and their loved ones.
The current study supports both the salience and uniqueness of human–animal relationships through this in-depth examination of relationship quality, loss, and coping. Comparisons to human relationships help to contextualize the salience of human–animal relationships. Emphasis on uniqueness highlights needs particular to individuals who have experienced the loss of a beloved companion animal. Grief is a universal process that is experienced when any significant loss occurs that is central to one’s identity. The companion animal relationships described by participants in this study appeared to not only be central to their identity as an individual but also part of their larger family and support systems.