It is acknowledged that the small sample size limits its generalizability. The study aimed to gather similar numbers of both male and female athletes to ensure both populations were represented. However, gaining an equal number of participants depending on type of sport (e.g., individual vs team, closed vs open skills) was not a priority. In this study, one athlete participated in a team sport and there was evidence that counterfactuals would be influenced by contextual factors such as being part of a group. For example, a team athlete might experience more counterfactuals directed at others’ behaviors that influence outcome. This might be seen as less controllable and might influence the consequences associated with the counterfactuals experienced. Future research might aim to explore these differences and the possible gender differences in the generation and experience of counterfactuals and their perceived consequences regarding elite athletes.
In using semistructured interviews to explore athletes’ counterfactuals, it is plausible that memory decay and poor reconstructive processes may have influenced participants’ responses (Brewer, Van Raalte, Linder, & Van Raalte 1991; Smith, Leffingwell, & Ptacek, 1999). Reporting on significant past events or capturing in the moment counterfactual thoughts, think out load protocols could be applied in future (Nicholls & Polman, 2008). However, both think out loud and semistructured interview protocols are researcher prompted. Alternative methods such as archival methods might be used to capture self-generated counterfactuals.
Despite the limitations, the use of currently competing elite athletes provided ecologically validity to the representation of counterfactuals experienced and their perceived consequences. Findings from this study could be of value for those in the applied settings working with both elite athletes and less experienced athletes. Upward counterfactuals present themselves when performance does not reach a certain level set by expectations or goals. It is therefore important to monitor each athlete’s expectations and ensure the athlete’s goals are flexible to alleviate negative emotional consequences that could be debilitative to performance or motivation. This may be shaped by the cultural environment and their goals. Goals around process and development may lead to an assimilation effect where motivation and performance can be enhanced. In relation to the REM (Markman & McMullen, 2003), upward counterfactual thoughts would be best used in a reflective process following an event to inform goals and intention for future practice and competitive behavior change. These could also be useful for significant others (e.g., coaches, physiotherapist, support staff) to inform how they might deal with issues brought up by the athlete that they might influence. For example, if there is conflict between two athletes then a coach might use each athlete’s counterfactuals using reflective practice to come up with a management strategy to overcome the issue. In addition, counterfactuals could be used to gain perspective on these goals and protect an athlete’s self-esteem following failure (McCrea, 2008). Beyond the scope of elite athletes, individuals who participate in performance related activities (e.g., business, sport & exercise practitioners, health services) would benefit from lessons learned from elite athletes to understand and suitably use counterfactuals to facilitate cognitive, emotional and behavioral change to enhance their practice.
This study taps into the experiences elite athletes have of counterfactuals. It also provides an insight into how elite athletes cope with the negatives effects of counterfactuals as well as use the positive effects of counterfactuals to improve and sustain high performance. Future research on elite athletes’ counterfactual thoughts using experimental and longitudinal studies would be beneficial to investigate the antecedents and consequences of counterfactual thinking on training and performance. The use of an elite population could be a useful source for understanding high performance athletes and how they experience thoughts, emotions and behaviors. By understanding how elite athletes generate, experience and reflect on counterfactuals, it is hoped other athletes can use counterfactuals to identify causal inferences and deploy accompanying changes to enhance both performance and motivation to succeed making sport more fulfilling and enjoyable.