Considering observation is a skilled practice it is alarming to find trainees have received minimal to no formal training in it. Evidence from trainees suggests they are implementing observation; however there is resounding indication this is founded on instinct and trial and error learning, rather than evidence-based practice as is endorsed by governing accreditation bodies (i.e., BPS and BASES). It is fair to assume that at this stage of a trainees’ career, observation skill is relatively low, therefore training in this much valued assessment should be essential. Proposed formal observation training was met with unanimous consensus across all trainee participants, explicitly showcasing the merit in providing such a platform of education. Most salient was the suggestion from trainees to focus on the how of observation as opposed to what and why. This conviction is supported through Brown et al. (2005) claiming current applied sport psychology training as being proficient in the development of individual techniques (i.e., what and why), but which is not adept at educating practitioners in navigating the complexities of an ever-changing sporting context (i.e., how). It is anticipated the sharing of experiences and knowledge from a varied range of practitioners, will enable reflective discussion and take home messages regarding associated challenges such as, coping with the demand of multiple variables (i.e., teams), distraction, documentation, and perception. Attention should also be given to developing an understanding of contextual intelligence and its propensity to open doors to generate greater effectiveness in applied delivery.
Practical recommendations for enhancing observation practice have been interspersed throughout this discussion. We feel it is critical that our clients are educated on the purpose and intention of observation in an attempt to dispel any negative association or discomfort linked to being observed. By selling its positive implications, it is anticipated that applied practitioners will be less inclined to conceal observation, and instead confidently observe and integrate themselves into the sporting environment. Resultant immersion into the client’s environment is recommended to help build a contextually intelligent practitioner. An increased presence, via informal observation, facilitates a deeper understanding of the complexities of a specific sporting culture, allowing practitioners to more effectively design and implement intervention. Furthermore, it is recommended to be seen in the sporting environment outside of ‘normal’ working hours in an outward display of enthusiasm and interest. Both the client and key stakeholders within the sporting organization are likely to be recognizant of this which is suggested to increase acceptance and strengthen relationships.
It is important to reflect on possible limitations of the study. Consideration is given to the combined participant sample of individuals supervised from two different accreditation systems with differing outcomes and training structures (i.e., BPS and BASES), and the potential impact this may have had on individual experiences. Reflecting on each focus group and their responses to questions regarding previous observation training, it was considered that all participants, regardless of background or training pathway produced similar answers. Thus authors felt that all participants had similar foundations in observation knowledge irrespective of which accreditation system they were affiliated with, and therefore the differences in supervision across both training pathways would be minimal. Secondly, it is recognized that a wider group of trainees from a bigger sample of supervisors across the United Kingdom may provide a better representation than drawing from a small cluster of supervisors. Lastly, it is important to consider the impact of researcher bias on the interpretation of data. Due to the relatively small community of trainee practitioners’ within the United Kingdom, the lead researcher had professional connections with some of the participants used in focus groups. However, to minimize the effects of potential researcher bias, a reflexive journal was kept in which the lead researcher acknowledged any bias and unintentional influence upon data collection and interpretation.
The most influential message to have emerged from this study is that observation is perceived to add substantial value to service delivery, which is currently vastly under acknowledged. Positive properties already associated with observation, such as triangulation and confirmatory evidence (Watson II & Shannon, 2010) has been largely reinforced, however findings have uncovered other significantly valued traits of observation. A running undercurrent throughout this discussion has been the role of contextual intelligence as an avenue worthy of much greater exploration due its potential for unlocking many of the perceived challenges already attached to observation. Exposure and raised awareness of these associated challenges (i.e., trainee preconceptions and perceptions of others) is imperative for the advancement of our profession. Future research should be directed toward the development of observation training if the profession of applied sport psychology is to aspire and develop toward an ever effective and successful discipline.