The use of Bayesian methods with this type of drawing predictor disposes of a methodological problem associated with the Hathaway and McKinley empirical item selection procedure discussed above. Selecting items for particular scales based solely on their correlation with a particular diagnostic group necessarily takes a toll on internal consistency. Dyer (1997) points out that the MMPI-2 manual lists coefficient alpha values that are only in the .50 s for five of the 10 basic scales. Heilbrun (1992) lists a reliability figure of at least .80 among the seven criteria for psychometric adequacy of assessment instruments used in forensic settings. In the case of Bayesian aggregation of individual predictors, however, it is essential that they not be highly correlated, in order to avoid artificially inflated posterior probability values (McGrath, personal communication, July 26, 2012).
One psychometric issue discussed in Lilienfeld et al. (2000) is that of incremental validity. Lilienfeld et al. stated that they are unaware of any research that demonstrates that HFDs offer psychologically useful information beyond that provided through other types of evaluation data, including the restandardized MMPI-2, psychiatric interviews, and demographic data. It has been the author’s experience that subjects referred for forensic assessment are often highly guarded and defensive, concealing important elements of their personal histories in the clinical interview and responding to self-report clinical personality testing with extreme positive impression management, often to such an extent as to render the test record uninterpretable except as an indicator of defensiveness. It would therefore be highly informative to examine the incremental validity of drawing indicators over such self-report personality test scales as the PAI Violence Potential Index against actual criteria of violence. Many other incremental validity analyses could be designed that, if demonstrating a significant improvement in validity over self-report measures alone, could assist forensic psychologists in overcoming problems related to guardedness and positive impression management in responding to instruments such as the PAI, MCMI-III, and MMPI-2.
Ideally, drawings from the present forensic/clinical sample should be compared with a community sample to determine frequency of individual drawing indicators in the general population. This would also bring operating characteristics of the procedure in line with the statistics of the general population and permit a more naturalistic study of the instrument’s relatively low SPEC, which is presently a significant limiting factor with respect to the obtained validities. Incorporating the results of such a study into practical applications in forensic assessment would entail making a choice between the psychometric approach of scales such as the Millon Clinical Multiaxial Inventory-III, normed on an exclusively clinical sample in the interests of generalizing to clinical assessment, and scales like the PAI that also include a community sample.
The use of drawings and associations with demonstrated empirical validity allows for culture-free evaluation in forensic contexts where subjects do not possess a sufficiently high reading level in English or in their native language to permit the administration of self-report tests such as the MMPI-2, MCMI-III, and PAI. Additionally, the lack of structure of drawing methods deprives subjects of cues as to how to respond. This characteristic has the potential to reduce impression management, in contrast to self-report inventories where the social desirability of item responses is usually apparent to even moderately sophisticated examinees.