As a potential caveat, it should be noted that it is possible that ToS influences motivational behavior by impairing instrumental control rather than by promoting aversive Pavlovian control. However, we believe that this is unlikely for a number of reasons. First, the present results are consistent with the previously discussed studies indicating that anxiety affects Pavlovian mechanisms (Duits et al., 2015; Lissek et al., 2005; Robinson, Overstreet, et al., 2013). Strikingly, a recent study demonstrated that avoidance behavior in mood and anxiety disorders is driven by aversive Pavlovian biases as tested in a similar Pavlovian-instrumental task (Mkrtchian et al., 2017). Second, in contrast to instrumental behaviors, aversive Pavlovian biases are evolutionary adaptive and rapid mechanisms evolved to avoid potential harm and increase survival (Dickinson & Balleine, 2002). They may therefore have a particularly important role in adaptive anxiety, which itself is likely an evolutionary adaptive mechanism. Thus from an evolutionary standpoint, it would make sense for anxiety, a state that accompanies potentially threatening situations, to potentiate a mechanism programmed to avoid harm, as opposed to disengaging the instrumental system. If anxiety instead impaired the instrumental system, it would likely lead to increased exposure of harmful situations because, as highlighted above, the instrumental and Pavlovian systems are generally aligned to facilitate optimal behaviors in nature (Rangel et al., 2008). Based on these findings, we propose that the most plausible explanation for our results is that anxiety influences motivational behavior via modulation of aversive Pavlovian processes. However, we acknowledge that these results do not provide definitive evidence that the increased inhibition under threat is driven by aversive Pavlovian biases. In light of this, interpretations are tentative and future studies are warranted to confirm the present results.
As a further caveat, it should be noted that the no-go conditions were not significantly different from each other. We might expect performance to be significantly slower in the NGA condition compared with the NGW condition as the Pavlovian and instrumental controllers both promote inhibitory responses (slowing of responses) in the NGA condition while they compete in the NGW condition. However, the response bias, HR, and FAR scores all indicate that the reinforcement schedules were in fact successful in generating an action bias. This lack of difference might be attributed to RTs in the no-go conditions being at floor levels. Indeed, there was no significant difference between the GA condition under threat compared with the NGA condition under safe and threat. This is perhaps surprising as we would expect the NGA condition to produce the slowest responses as both Pavlovian and instrumental responses promote inhibition (while the slowing of responses in the GA condition under threat is only driven by the Pavlovian no-go bias). It thus seems that the slowest participants can perform on this task is capped at the level of the GA condition under threat. It is therefore not entirely clear whether the effect of ToS on Pavlovian-instrumental interactions is driven simply by an aversive Pavlovian bias, or if it is specific to when Pavlovian bias conflicts with instrumental processes in an aversive context. Another possibility might be that the conflict between Pavlovian and instrumental controllers in the NGW condition promote cautiousness and slowing, rendering it similarly slow as the NGA condition. A final possibility is that this specific task is simply insensitive to appetitive Pavlovian-instrumental conflict. However, we believe that if ToS affected appetitive conflict as well, it would still have been revealed by the present task. Specifically, if ToS induced a general slowing of responses, regardless of an appetitive or aversive context, we would also expect to see slowing of responses under threat in the GW condition. This is not supported by the data. If, on the other hand, ToS induced a greater reliance on Pavlovian appetitive biases or impaired instrumental control in the appetitive condition, we would expect faster responses under threat in the NGW condition. Faster response times would be possible, as evidenced by faster response times on other conditions. However, this effect of threat was not observed. Moreover, the present results are in line with previous studies demonstrating that ToS only affects aversive but not appetitive conditions (for a review see Robinson, Vytal, et al., 2013). In summary, our view is that the most parsimonious explanation for the results that were observed is that threat impacts aversive Pavlovian responding. However, future studies might plausibly explore the impact of stimulus presentation duration on RTs to attempt to tease these effects apart.
Finally, it should be noted that our main analysis slightly deviated from the original study (Crockett et al., 2009) such that the first practice block was chosen as the response latency baseline as opposed to the first neutral block. Prior to analysis, we reasoned that this would be the most appropriate measure of baseline RTs in our study. Another possible baseline could have been the first neutral block during the safe condition, in accordance with Crockett et al. (2009). However, due to the counterbalanced threat manipulation in our study, only half of the participants experienced the first neutral block under the safe condition. Power to detect an effect would therefore be reduced to 50% with this baseline, and perhaps more importantly, the threat manipulation would no longer be counterbalanced, rendering it an inappropriate baseline choice. Future studies should include a neutral block before the threat manipulation to assess baseline RTs, so as to replicate the analyses of Crockett et al. (2009) precisely.
In conclusion, this is the first study to suggest that ToS selectively promotes punishment-induced inhibition in motivational behavior. Importantly, the present study provides a potential mechanistic understanding of this: Adaptive anxiety promotes avoidant behavior in potentially harmful situations by increasing reliance on aversive Pavlovian processes.