Moving further into the vignette with “weighing the risks for the journey ahead,” complexity is layered into why it is that the athlete struggles playing out the role of “newcomer.” Blodgett et al. (2014) referred to this struggle as navigating the outsider–insider hyphen, wherein the athlete is never fully considered an insider or an outsider but is simply in a state of flux in between these positions. Within the previous, initial theme, the authors found the athlete referring to the earliest steps associated with acculturation—getting oneself rooted in schooling, a job, and in a physical locale, aspects commonly identified in acculturation scholarship (e.g., Schwartz et al., 2010; Steiner, 2009). With the vignette’s expansion in this theme, there is an overt focus on what is already recognized as a delicate topic—forging social relationships with peers (Berry, 1997). The athlete clearly wishes to belong among peers and yet finds that seeking this acceptance has become a series of trade-offs (Schinke et al., 2013). These tradeoffs include the beginnings of being ridiculed, first for not understanding what is being said and then later for the accent the athlete brings to social exchanges, when able to make oneself understood. These punishing formative experiences appear to deepen Ryba et al.’s (2012) findings in sport contexts where there is a lack of interest in relatedness or understanding on the part of those from the receiving country. There appears to be a taken-for-granted assumption that the dominant group need not engage in any form of acculturation and that when they do, these are unusual experiences. Cultural learning seems to be imposed on the newcomer in a manner that deepens feelings of loneliness and isolation (see Blodgett & Schinke, 2015; Schinke et al., 2013). We find in this theme that for the athlete to be accepted, there must first be tolerance that one is going to be laughed at and stung. Furthermore, there will be no acknowledgment by the receiving culture of the emotional and psychological repercussions for these athletes, deepening the divide and distrust between receivers and the newcomer and sustaining the tenuous moves form positive to negative (see Blodgett & Schinke, 2015). Should the athlete accept and open oneself to these assaults, new friendships can be forged at the expense of tolerating ridicule and being systematically emotionally injured (Ryba et al., 2012). The hope is to become closer with peers, but what sits in the balance is the athlete’s feelings of humiliation or anger of becoming the brunt of a standing joke, with open emotional sores (Schinke et al., 2006). The question then lingers: Will attempting to learn the language be a step toward forging friendships, or might it materialize into having the newcomer constantly navigating the borderland between outside and insider, contributing to emotional exhaustion?
The sport psychology consultant has an important role to play in supporting the newcomer in this frustrating process, ideally in strategies that foster engagement instead of avoidance. The consultant is clearly not able to help craft a welcoming environment throughout the day, because the environment under discussion is away from sport. However, the consultant can follow up with the newcomer and seek to understand what sorts of social connections are being forged and whether the athlete is being ridiculed. The consultant might also help structure a functional network for the athlete among peer athletes to ensure that acceptance, at least within the sport environment, is adaptive and sensitized to the challenges posed by being a newcomer when away from sport. The aforementioned aspects place the onus of acculturating on the newcomer, and it should be recognized that acculturation is a highly interactive/social process. In addition to the direct work undertaken with the athlete, the practitioner might also reflexively examine where she or he might be contributing to feelings of alienation on the part of the athlete (McGannon & Johnson, 2009; Schinke et al., 2012). Some critical reflections should also be undertaken by consultants, by placing themselves in the shoes of newcomers with whom they work with and asking, “How would I feel if I were in a similar new situation, where layers of unfamiliarity are being encountered all at once?” The consultant might also consider, “How would I want to be approached and supported if I were the newcomer?” This shifting spotlight onto the sport psychologist would permit critical introspection, leading to sensitized understandings of what the newcomer might be undergoing away from sport.
The story then continues in the final theme, “Public Stonings,” with the athlete opening up a much deeper analysis of the pain associated with what it is like to acculturate. The athlete describes the initial shock of having to come up to speed with unfamiliar cultural practices and ways of doing things quickly upon landing in the receiving country, akin to what has been referred to as culture shock (Blodgett et al., 2014). In relation to experiencing culture shock, the vignette now exemplifies facets that the athlete associates with being overloaded with new information and practices to make sense of as part of second culture learning (see Rudmin, 2009) and why overloading happens, leading to the metaphor of being pelted by rocks, and all that it is associated with (e.g., ridicule, emotional pain). There are many commonly found aspects that need attending to, each its own rock, such as managing educational needs, struggling through new tastes and unfamiliar food, and living in a new location (see also Bowskill et al., 2007). While the athlete is experiencing these unfamiliar aspects of the receiving country and locale (see also Schinke et al., 2007), there are no supportive social connections to draw upon as guides, or as refuge, to help smooth the transition. These uncharted experiences are akin to what Schinke et al. (2013) referred to as shouldered acculturation (see also Bowskill et al., 2007). When there are no guides to link up with to help mentor the newcomer, much of the learning is gained firsthand. These attempts seem nerve-racking with many painful missteps, the first ones albeit tentative, that leave the athlete exposed and humiliated, similar to Tanaka’s (2014) professional rugby players, Meisterjahn and Wrisberg’s (2013) professional basketball players, or Schinke et al.’s (2011) boxers. In relation to these early catalysts, the sport psychology consultant can serve as someone who listens and seeks to understand how it is that the newcomer athlete feels overwhelmed when away from the training environment. The consultant can also serve as an initial contact person and social connector for the newcomer, linking the athlete to pertinent resources and community groups. This offering might continue, with the support of the coaching staff, until the athlete develops a social network of peers. Once peer relationships are formed, these people might begin to help mentor and support athletes toward settlement. Undertaking this broader support might avert athletes, such as the minor league baseball players Kontos (2009) identified, withdrawing from the receiving culture, underachieving in sport, and becoming underutilized and eventually deselected.
Within this project, a focus was placed on life outside of sport for national and international amateur athletes who became citizens in an unfamiliar receiving country. The vignette, comprising three themes, reveals layers of uncertainty that seem to serve as barriers to healthy social relationships outside of the sport environment. These uncertainties include, on one hand, recognition of the possibilities the unfamiliar country might offer and, in the balance, tenuous challenges that might impede the acculturation process. Although no clear solutions can be brought forth from a single project in relation to how any newcomer might navigate acculturation challenges outside of the sport environment, there is evidence that this part of the acculturation process (i.e., the nonsport experiences) is extremely delicate, highly social, and possibly damaging to the newcomer. Although solutions regarding how to effectively acculturate are not easily determined, it does become clearer that the role of the sport psychology consultant in relation to this process necessitates a holistic approach to practice, working with the whole person, in relation to nonsport life. Conversely, focusing exclusively on the sport context would be to ignore a sizeable part of the newcomer’s life during these moments of vulnerability.