The present results address two issues of theoretical importance. First, they provide strong support for a view involving the roles of spatial precision and flexibility in the splitting of attentional sets. As described in the introduction, a number of researchers have argued that the visual system can be configured in such a way as to maintain attentional sets for two different features at two separate spatial locations. For example, Adamo et al. (2008) asked observers to search for a green item on the right or a blue item on the left. The target was preceded by a non-predictive cue that shared the same location and/or colour as the target. Reaction times for target discrimination were shorter when the colour and location of the target were consistent with those of the cue. The researchers suggested that separate attentional sets can be concurrently maintained at two spatial locations. However, other studies have provided evidence against the configuration of such localized attentional sets for multiple features. For example, Becker et al. (2015) implemented a task that was conceptually similar task to the one used by Adamo et al. (2008), with the exception that the target was spatially accompanied by non-target items. The accuracy of target identification was impaired by the appearance of a distractor item whose colour was the same as the potential target in the other hemifield. Becker et al. argued that when splitting is required, attentional sets are applied globally rather than restricted to a specific hemifield. We argue that Adamo et al.’s and Becker et al.’s tasks may not be optimal for examining the spatial precision of attentional splitting because of the possibility that distractors would appear at potential target locations. It is reasonable that attention would be captured by distractors appearing at locations that observers monitor for targets. In this sense, the present study represents the first rigorous examination of spatial precision in the maintenance of attentional sets when splitting is required
Second, the present findings of set-specific capture (Experiments 5 and 7) highlight an aspect of attentional focus that is assumed to be involved during search involving multiple features (e.g., red and green). Specifically, Moore and Weissman (2010, 2011, 2014) argued that set-specific capture is triggered by a distractor of the same colour (e.g., red) as the target. The distractor results in the corresponding attentional set (e.g., targeting red items, rather than targeting oddballs) to enter a limited-capacity focus of attention in working memory (Jonides et al., 2008; Oberauer, 2002). They suggest that the set is briefly maintained, resulting in poor identification of a differently coloured (i.e., green) item because one of the valid attentional sets (i.e., targeting green items) cannot enter the focus of attention. Hence, processing is easier when the colour of the subsequent target matches that of the set in focus. Our results suggest that the entry of an attentional set into the focus of attention is not entirely automatic but is modulated by top-down control. If entry were automatic, then target identification should have been facilitated by a same-colour distractor preceding the target in the singleton-detection stream. Given that the apparent benefit of exposure to the same-colour distractor was demonstrated to be spurious by the lower accuracy obtained under the different-colour condition, reflecting a feature bias in favour of red items (see the inset analysis of Experiment 6, Figure 7), we have no clear evidence of a benefit arising from samecolour distractors. The elimination of the samecolour distractors advantage upon a reduction in the bias favouring red targets (Experiment 5) is also consistent with the idea that the entry of an attentional set into the focus of attention is modulated by topdown knowledge. This aspect of attentional focus has not been explicitly addressed in previous studies (Moore & Weissman, 2010, 2011, 2014) and is illuminated by the results of the present study.
Obviously, the present results do not indicate an overriding of one of the search modes by the other. If observers had relied exclusively on the featuresearch mode, accuracy would have been unimpaired under the different-colour distractor condition relative to under the control condition for both streams. If the singleton-detection mode was used exclusively, accuracy under the same-colour condition would have been lowest for both streams. However, neither of these patterns was observed. Of course these results do not exclude the possibility that the singleton detection mode was used with partial facilitation (e.g., Moore & Weissman, 2010). It is also possible that observers may have switched between strategies on a trial-by-trial basis. In that case, however, we would expect a consistent pattern of singleton detection for one stream and a consistent pattern of feature search for the other stream, although overall accuracy would have been low for both search types because observers would miss the target when it appeared in the unattended stream. This prediction is inconsistent with the present results.
To conclude, the present results highlight the flexibility, as well as the limitations, of the attentional sets used to monitor for the appearance of targets presented among multiple, sequential non-target items. Previous studies have primarily focused on whether two feature-based attentional sets can be concurrently established, whereas the present study was unique in addressing whether two different attentional control settings can be concurrently maintained. In other words, the central issue addressed by previous studies was the assignment of multiple features to multiple locations using the featuresearch mode. The present study extended the domain of investigation beyond the scope of the feature-search mode by testing for the possibility of combining search modes, as well as examining the limits of multiple feature-search strategies. The visual system was found to be flexible enough to maintain attentional sets when observers detected two singletons at different locations. However, the results indicate that the observers were unable to apply the singleton-detection and the feature-search modes concurrently in the same visual display. The system was not capable of maintaining a mixture of singleton-detection and feature-search modes at different locations, as shown by the disruption of a clear pattern in the singleton-detection stream. We found set-specific capture (Ito & Kawahara, 2016; Moore & Weissman, 2010, 2011, 2014; Roper & Vecera, 2012) occurring in both singleton-detection and featuresearch streams. The finding that the presence or absence of set-specific capture in the feature-search stream depends on the trial composition of distractor colours suggests that the entry of an attentional set into the focus of attention is not entirely automatic but is modulated by top-down control.