The most pervasive misunderstanding we found, which we term the “investigational misconception,” was that all research involves testing a new, nonvalidated intervention, whereas the actual goal of ROMP is to compare existing, approved interventions and fill gaps in medical knowledge about their relative effects with different groups of patients. The investigational misconception, which has not been previously described, manifested in different ways: some respondents said they would participate because they believed it was their only chance to get a new and beneficial medication, while others declined because they did not want to risk receiving a placebo or an untested medication. As ROMP becomes increasingly common, the investigational misconception is ethically problematic because it could result in both over- and under enrollment. Some patients might consider enrolling in ROMP because they believe it is the only way to receive a standard treatment. Other patients might not consider enrolling because of an unfounded fear of receiving a placebo or an investigational intervention, in spite of the fact that ROMP includes neither. To avoid these unwanted outcomes, efforts to improve informed consent for ROMP—such as pragmatic clinical trials of multimedia consent tools, which have begun to show promise for overcoming this misconception25—are needed. In addition, alternative study designs and approaches to notification should be considered and assessed to see if they may also help minimize misconceptions.
However, it is important to acknowledge that even significant efforts to improve prospective participants’ understanding of ROMP may fail to address all possible misunderstandings.26 Notably, the misconceptions we highlighted in this study were among the issues that our animated videos were designed to explain. It is clear that more work is needed to improve the efficacy of future educational tools, at least to the extent that these issues are necessary for prospective participants to understand. In addition, we also conducted follow-up interviews with a limited number of survey respondents for the purpose of improving future surveys; while we did not systematically analyze the interview data, those interviews suggested that at least some respondents continued to have misconceptions even after lengthy discussion. Thus, providing thorough education about all aspects of ROMP will likely be an ongoing challenge. Further research is needed to better understand the prevalence and persistence of the investigational misconception and other misunderstandings about ROMP, as well as what steps investigators can take to minimize their effects on enrollment decisions.
This study has two main limitations. First, the open ended questions were designed to allow survey respondents to submit brief comments and thus did not allow for expanded discussion or clarification. Subsequent qualitative work could continue to explore the themes identified in this study. Second, our survey presented hypothetical scenarios rather than actual enrollment decisions. Because this was an exploratory study and not embedded in an actual trial, the scenarios lacked some contextual information that would likely inform enrollment decisions. The specificity of the scenarios also limits our findings’ applicability to other types of research that could fall within a broader definition of ROMP or comparative effectiveness research. Therefore, we offer our findings as an overview of the range of factors patients consider, not as a definitive accounting of their decision-making process for a particular study. Further study is needed in the context of ongoing pragmatic clinical trials to assess participants’ actual, rather than hypothetical, reasons for participating.
Despite these limitations, this exploratory study is strengthened by the large number of respondents and the use of open-ended questions, which allowed us to identify respondents’ top priorities related to participation in ROMP in their own words and to describe the range of ROMP-specific reasons, concerns, and misconceptions related to study participation. This study provides insight into the important question of why people are or are not willing to consider participating in ROMP and offers a starting point for future research. Moreover, the investigational misconception may present an obstacle to recruitment and informed decision-making by patients invited to participate in ROMP; overcoming this fundamental misunderstanding of the nature of ROMP is a critical issue for future research.