The present study has limitations that, if addressed, could strengthen the findings. First, there were time constraints for the intervention, which meant that participants were not fully exposed to all elements of REBT. Specifically, participants were not set behavioral homework assignments, such as flooding, and were not taught emotional strategies, such as rational-emotive imagery, in the REBT education workshops. Behavioral and emotional assignments REBT are considered to an important part of REBT, but it is necessary to monitor homework completion. But the group-level nature of the REBT intervention in the current study was logistically prohibitive with regards to setting and reviewing homework, as it would not have been possible within the time limits to review each participants homework as would be typical in one-to-one REBT. Therefore, without the scope to properly monitor and regulate homework adherence, and as is typical in group-level REBT (Turner et al., 2014; 2015), the assignment of homework was omitted in the current study. Nonetheless, the omission of homework could affect the quality of the REPDMS session. Researchers in sport should start to apply more comprehensive REBT programs, as short programs have been found to yield short-term benefits (e.g., Turner et al., 2014). Second, although participants volunteered for the study, their participation was not a result of a needs analysis. The effects of the intervention could be maximized by ensuring that participants present with high irrational beliefs at baseline, by screening athlete populations as part of the sampling process. In practice, REBT may be best applied to athletes who have high irrational beliefs to reduce the cost and time commitment for sports organizations, and ensures that all participants experience maximum benefits. However, away from a research paradigm, practitioners should be aware that REBT is not just a remedial approach to applied work, and can be used with any athlete who wishes to strengthen their current rational beliefs and learn to challenge and dispute their irrational beliefs.
Another possible limitation may have been that some participants were at different periods in their season. Some participants, such as the tennis players, had important competitions coming up after the REPDMS, while for others the season was almost over. Athletes who had no more competitions for this season may have engaged less in the program. But those who were still competing may have been highly engaged as there performance relevant emotions would have been more salient. Indeed, psychological and emotional states may change in the lead-up to competition, with for example increased somatic state anxiety intensity as the event draw nearer, and a stabilization in cognitive state anxiety (e.g., Cerin, Szabo, Hunt, & Williams, 2000; Mabweazara, Andrews, & Leach, 2014). In addition, participants were involved in various sports and it may be more ecologically valid to study athletes from the same team, such as in previous research (Turner et al., 2015), where similar activating events and irrational may be expressed. Future researchers should use a more homogenous sample of athletes from the same team at the same period of their competitive season. For example, Turner et al. (2015) completed a between-groups REBT program within the same cohort of athletes, including a control group, finding reductions in irrational beliefs for the REBT group and not for the control group. Finally, given that PDMS is in essence a team building intervention, future research should include measures of group dynamics (e.g., cohesion) as is typical in past research (Carron & Spink, 1993; Dunn & Holt, 2004; Holt & Dunn, 2006; Paradis & Martin, 2012), alongside markers of individual belief change.
It should also be recognized that social validation data were not collected in the current study, which deviates from past singe-case research (e.g., Turner et al., 2015). Social validation would have helped to interpret the data presented (e.g., Page & Thelwell, 2013), and may have reduced speculation as to the mechanisms of change in irrational and rational beliefs found in the current study. In PDMS research, qualitative data from participants regarding the process is potential important (Dunn & Holt, 2004), and inclusion of social validation in the current study may have aided the future administration of REPDMS. Future researchers should consider using social validation interviews (e.g., Page & Thelwell, 2013) with participants to provide a greater understanding of perceived intervention effects.
To conclude, the current study is the first published study to examine and support the use of REPDMS to reduce irrational beliefs and stabilize elevated rational beliefs in athletes. Indeed, no other published study has documented the use of REPDMS, thus giving the current study novelty within REBT and sport and exercise literatures. The present study is also the first published study to report the use of REBT with Greek athletes, thus extending the understanding of how REBT can be applied cross-culturally. This study contributes to the growing research concerning the use of REBT in sport settings, and especially contributes to the work reported within group contexts. The findings that REPDMS is able to reduce irrational beliefs and stabilize elevated rational beliefs compared with REBT education has clear implications for the provision of REBT in sport. The notion that sharing the REBT process in a PDMS session can enhance the effects of REBT may provide practitioners with a valuable tool for use in group-settings, and is a promising area for further study. It is hoped that the current study encourages other practitioners to apply REBT in their practice, and importantly, to report athlete experiences of REBT in literature.