President Trump's tacky dismissal of Secretary of State Rex Tillerson on Tuesday was the right decision, if almost certainly for the wrong reasons and announced in the wrong way (by tweet). 
Tillerson, a lifelong oilman who had risen to chief executive of behemoth ExxonMobil, was an unorthodox choice last year to become America's chief diplomat, and he never quite rose to the challenge.
He earned his departure, effective March 31, because the State Department under his leadership was hollowed-out and demoralized as diplomatic crises burned in hot spots around the world.
Preoccupied with reorganizing the sprawling agency, Tillerson acquiesced to large budget cuts that Congress mostly and properly ignored. Failure to fill crucial positions left seven of nine administrative posts empty, a 60% vacancy rate among top-tier career diplomats and a free fall in new applications.
One crucial example of the brain drain: Just as Trump agreed to ascend the Everest of negotiations — a face-to-face meeting with North Korea's Kim Jong Un — there is no U.S. ambassador to South Korea, assistant secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs, or undersecretary of State for arms control and international security. And, oh yes, the chief U.S. envoy to North Korea just retired abruptly.
There's no evidence, however, that Tillerson was fired for his management failures. Rather, it was his frequent clashes with Trump on issues where Tillerson's pragmatic instincts were right, among them sticking with the Paris climate agreement and upholding the Iran nuclear deal. "We disagreed on things," Trump told reporters after the firing.
Tillerson, who barely mentioned Trump in Tuesday's remarks at the State Department, never clicked with his impulsive boss and never recovered from the leaked comment that he had called Trump a "moron."
Trump, complaining to underlings that Tillerson's views were "totally establishment," too often left his secretary of State looking foolish. The president once tweeted that Tillerson's bid to negotiate with Pyongyang was a waste of time — then months later surprised him by agreeing to direct talks with Kim. The result was that foreign governments were never sure that America's chief diplomat spoke for America, or even the White House — an unsustainable situation.
Trump's pick to succeed Tillerson, the more hawkish CIA Director Mike Pompeo, enjoys much better rapport with Trump. The choice was long rumored. But at his upcoming confirmation hearings, Pompeo, who has little diplomatic experience, deserves close scrutiny by the Senate for his controversial views on topics ranging from torture to the Russian investigation.
In addition, Pompeo should be asked about his strange decision, apparently at Trump's urging last year, to meet with a conspiracy theorist who argues that the theft of Democratic emails was an inside job rather than Russian malfeasance. Although personal chemistry is important, Trump and the nation would be ill-served by installation of a yes man in such a sensitive post.
The coming change offers an opportunity for a reset at State — and the risk of a Trump foreign policy going even further off the rails.