Stephen Hawking, one of the greatest scientists of the modern age, died this week at 76. The pioneering astrophysicist spent his life changing the way we think about the universe, but some people say his obituaries show how much work remains in changing how we think about people with disabilities.
Social media users decried some coverage of Hawking's death as "ableist," a term to describe discrimination or prejudice against people who are disabled. Hawking, who was diagnosed with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) when he was 21, used a wheelchair and communicated through a computerized voice system. While the media described his remarkable scientific achievements, many also fixated on his ALS, something advocates say perpetuates stereotypes about people living with disabilities.
"There are people who think he's a hero because he lived with this degenerative motor neuron disability. Well, no. The alternative to that was dying," said Colleen Kelly Starkloff, co-founder of the Starkloff Disability Institute, which works to change attitudes about people with disabilities. Starkloff and her late husband Max Starkloff, who was disabled, met Hawking at a White House reception in 1998. "He wanted to live. He wanted to make a contribution. He was a curious man, and he did a great deal to help us think differently about the universe. ... His pictures will draw attention to his disability. What should be focused on primarily was that this man was a genius and that he advanced physics in a way that most people have not."
Many stories about Hawking's death used phrases such as "overcame his disability," or "in spite of his disability," which Starkloff said have negative connotations. As one Twitter user wrote, "We really need to stop referring to disability and success/achievement as if they're somehow diametrically opposed."
People also took issue with cartoons depicting Hawking standing in heaven — a place he did not believe in — for implying he was now finally "free."
Hawking's accomplishments were extraordinary for anyone, able-bodied or not, and yet in a headline recapping his life Buzzfeed wrote "Stephen Hawking, Astrophysicist With A Paralyzing Disease, Dies At 76."
From the Washington Post's obit: "Stephen W. Hawking, the British theoretical physicist who overcame a devastating neurological disease to probe the greatest mysteries of the cosmos and become a globally celebrated symbol of the power of the human mind, died March 14 at his home in Cambridge, England."
From CNN's obit: "Stephen Hawking, the brilliant British theoretical physicist who overcame a debilitating disease to publish wildly popular books probing the mysteries of the universe, has died, according to a family spokesman."
From USA TODAY's obit, which has since been corrected: "Despite his physical ailments, he was known for a direct and dry wit, often combining the marvelous and mundane in his observations."