When you want to work in the White House, it’s important to tell the truth.
I don’t mean that from an ethical perspective, though of course it’s important to tell the truth for the good of society, too. I’m talking about practicality. As the frenzied untangling of the Trump administration’s histories shows, when you work in the White House, telling the truth can save you a lot of hassle, and the rest of the country a lot of worry. Working as Barack Obama’s director of scheduling and advance in the weeks before the 2008 presidential election, I learned this through what I thought at the time was the hard way: by doing it.
I’ve written before about my struggles with the SF86, the extensive form you must fill out if you need national security clearance. The form is the starting point for the FBI’s interviews and background checks, which they use to evaluate a person’s fitness to serve in high-stakes positions. It’s no joke. Though my SF86-related panic attacks had mainly to do with my lifelong love of marijuana, these interviews are about a lot more than having done a bump of coke in a club in college.
Even the most junior potential staffers are expected to spill the details of everything they did since the age of 18 — where they lived, their landlords, the contact information for their French cousins they visit every summer. My dorm at the University of Wisconsin had been torn down; to complete the form, I had to show the FBI on Google Earth where it had been and give contact information for people who could validate it had existed. I had to call my boss at a job I had when I was 26 and which I quit, badly, on the day they gave me my bonus. I had to ask if I could provide his phone number, email and address to the FBI. If part of your family lives in a remote village in Siberia, chances are you won’t get your final clearance until the FBI has talked to them.
I mention the nitty-gritty, behind-the-scenes things we had to deal with not to be a martyr or because any of us felt the intensity of the questioning was unfair or inappropriate. I tell you this because it was a job to complete this form, and it was a job we all — senior advisers and junior assistants alike — took seriously. We knew that the security of the United States could be compromised if we screwed up the SF86. That was far more important than saving ourselves from an awkward conversation with an FBI agent; mine was about whether it was accurate to say I’d smoked weed “more than 500 times” in my life.
Now, imagine we’re not talking about staffers. Imagine we’re talking about the president. Actually, never mind. No need to imagine. We are talking about the president. With every passing news cycle, the current administration is learning this lesson, about the importance of telling the truth, an even harder way. The total failure to follow protocol, to tell the truth about staffers’ backgrounds, is biting them in the ass.