In April 2016, at a campaign stop on the campus of SUNY Purchase, just north of New York City, I filmed a short video of Hillary Clinton. I captured the former secretary of state berating my friend for asking if she would commit to refusing money from the fossil fuel lobby. “I’m so sick,” Clinton answered, “I’m so sick of the Sanders campaign lying about this.”
The video quickly went viral, partly because of the outsized response from a famously tight-lipped politician, partly because it played so well into the Democratic primary narrative that pitted Clinton, buddy-buddy with Wall Street, against the people-powered challenge of Sen. Bernie Sanders.
The furor that the video generated sprang from fissures in the Democratic Party that perfunctory resistance to President Donald Trump has only papered over. Americans care deeply about who finances our lawmakers, an issue often framed as a proxy for whether our politicians can be trusted. One wing of the Democratic Party, represented in 2016 by Clinton, sees corporate money like fossil fuel donations as the price of business in Washington. The other wing, awakened by Sanders’ muscular grassroots fundraising operation, views big-pocketed donors as anathema.
These factions will battle each other again in primaries this year. To mount the strongest challenge to the party of Trump in November, the Democrats will need to energize their young activist base. They must commit to what Clinton would not ― refusing fossil fuel money. The wellbeing of our climate and our communities is at stake.
In an era when schoolchildren are cut down by assault weapons with horrifying regularity, climate change can seem like a distant problem, a speck on the horizon. It’s not. It’s a present and deadly reality ― just ask the 900,000 Puerto Ricans without power five months after Hurricane Maria slammed into their homes.
Common sense dictates that the economy undergo a massive restructuring away from fossil fuels to save lives. And a growing body of research shows that the only way to avoid catastrophic levels of climate change is to cease production of vast amounts of “unburnable” carbon. Accomplishing this requires bold government action ― not faith in the current system that subsidizes both the production of fossil fuels and the salaries of oil and gas executives.