The firing of Rex Tillerson occupied much of the news yesterday as shocked anchors recounted how the Secretary of State was effectively dispatched by a single Trump tweet. The shock, however, should not be over Twitter but torture. Once CIA Director Mike Pompeo replaces Tillerson, President Donald Trump wants Pompeo's second in command to take over the CIA: Deputy Director Gina Haspel.
Most people have no idea who Haspel is. She is, however, well-known to human rights advocates and civil libertarians around the world. Haspel was not simply a key figure in the torture program run by the Bush administration, she headed one of the infamous foreign black sites and was accused of knowingly destroying evidence of the torture carried out on her watch. 
After years of Congress and former Bush officials denouncing the torture program, the confirmation of Haspel would reaffirm that torture as not simply acceptable but a potential path to promotion in the United States. Trump has declared the possible confirmation of the agency’s first female director as a “historic milestone.” Given her role in the torture program, however, Haspel’s confirmation would be equally historic and one milestone we would be wise to avoid.
The torture program approved by former president George W. Bush on Sept. 17, 2001, represented one of the most infamous moments in our history. The Justice Department memo used to justify the program was ultimately denounced by the Justice Departmentas seriously flawed and withdrawn. The program was ultimately closed as both Republicans and Democrats belatedly lined up to pledge to block any such program in the future. On Dec. 30, 2005, the Detainee Treatment Act was passed to reaffirm the long-established fact that waterboarding is torture and torture is a violation of not just international law but United States law.
The shocking accounts of the U.S. torture program destroyed the credibility of the United States and emboldened our enemies in China and other countries in their own use of torture. Among these shocking accounts, however, one CIA officer and one case stood out: Haspel and the torture of Abu Zubayda. Zubayda was the subject of one of the CIA’s “extraordinary rendition programs” where suspects were taken to foreign locations were they were tortured. Haspel was the “Chief of Base” at the Thai torture site known as CIA’s “Cat’s Eye.”
Zubayda was waterboarded 83 times in one month. He was denied sleep, forced into a small coffin-like box for long periods of time and physically abused, including having his head slammed into walls. The CIA reportedly got nothing from the torture but each session was carefully detailed by Haspel.
Accounts of the torture sessions describe “fluid intake and involuntary leg, chest and arm spasms" and "hysterical pleas." Zubaydah "became completely unresponsive, with bubbles rising through his open, full mouth." None of that mattered even when Zubaydah could no longer communicate and lost consciousness. There was only one person who could stop the sessions: chief of base Haspel ... and she didn’t.