Remember then-treasurer Joe Hockey's impassioned plea to the nation just on three years ago when he released the most recent Intergenerational Report?
"Madam Speaker, we need to ensure that we can pay for today, and we also need to ensure Australians will be able to afford the future. We are currently living beyond our means."
He ended with a flourish.
"We need to ensure that we take the steps now to ensure our prosperity for generations to come, that we leave nobody behind."
Fine sentiments. But rarely has the future looked more uncertain for our younger generations.
A rapidly expanding population may have kept our economy growing but it has put upward pressure on housing costs, downward pressure on wages and is squeezing the life out of our urban areas.
And increasingly, the older generation — of which your columnist sadly now is a member — appears determined not to ensure the prosperity of future generations, but to grab as much of the pie as humanly possible right now.
Woe betide anyone who stands in the way.
Prime Minister Malcolm Turnbull and Treasurer Scott Morrison learned that the hard way when they attempted to unwind some of the more generous aspects of superannuation two years ago.
And last week's move by Opposition Leader Bill Shorten to rescind a generous tax handout to retireeswho own shares sparked an uproar. More on that later.
Our taxation system overwhelmingly favours older Australians.
Thanks to an overhaul in 2007, retirees over the age of 60 can have up to $1.6 million in super and pay absolutely no income tax on the investment earnings the fund earns. Earnings on anything above that $1.6 million limit are taxed at just 15 per cent.
It's a policy that has distorted our tax system and left the federal budget bereft of billions.
Think about this. A retiree, earning $60,000 a year from a super fund pays no tax at all.
Compare that to a 30-year-old, earning exactly the same amount through a wage, who racks up an $11,047 tax bill.
Then add in a Medicare levy of $1,200.
On top of that, many younger workers have student loans to repay as well.