As the news arrived Friday night that former FBI Deputy Director Andrew McCabe had been fired by Attorney General Jeff Sessions, I felt a visceral numbness. The announcement had certainly been anticipated. Nonetheless, the expected blow still stunned the senses.
I have known Andy since he was a young SWAT operator on the FBI's New York Office SWAT team that I led as senior team leader. No matter my opinions on some of his actions as deputy director, this humiliatingly drawn-out public flogging had happened to "one of us."
The McCabe I knew was an ambitious ladder-climber whose sights were squarely fixed on advancement within the organization. But I never doubted his integrity, his dedication to duty, or his character. I found his decision not to immediately recuse himself -- even after his wife left the political arena -- from oversight of a case targeting Hillary Clinton a bad judgment call. The FBI has stated that McCabe acted in accordance with the agency's protocols while his wife was running for office.
And his possible violations of the Hatch Act while supporting his wife's failed Virginia senate campaign in 2015 is also worthy of scrutiny. However, an apparent lack of judgment doesn't equate to accusations of treason and criminality, as some have recklessly charged.
I never doubted Andy's fealty to the Constitution or the FBI's mission.
But the attorney general's decision to fire him was based on an inspector general's report that was critical of McCabe that has not yet been released to the public. The nonpartisan IG for the Department of Justice, Michael E. Horowitz, worked hand in glove with the FBI's Office of Professional Responsibility (OPR) on the case. The IG's recommendation to terminate McCabe is not predicated on timing, "optics" or empathy considerations.
Although the IG report's release should clear up any misconceptions as to the evidence gathered, the central charge appears to be "lack of candor." Folks unfamiliar with this agency vernacular should understand that what it equates to is "lying" to investigators. This covers anything and everything related to an administrative inquiry -- like an OPR investigation -- and doesn't only attach to sworn testimony at trial, or during a deposition, or that which is gathered under oath.
In my quarter-century of service in the FBI, I personally witnessed innumerable instances of forgivable egregious offenses by fellow employees. However, the one violation that always resulted in separation from the FBI was lying. I simply cannot recall an instance when an agent's career survived a proven case of "lack of candor."
Horowitz, appointed by President Barack Obama in 2012, heads a fiercely independent agency that relies on the facts it uncovers and follows the evidence, wherever it may lead. In my experience in the FBI, Horowitz's name was synonymous with ruthless efficiency and an apolitical mien.