NPR listeners are a compassionate bunch. All week they have been emailing to say they are anxious to know what happened to 19-year-old Jada Wilson in northeast Houston, who on Sunday told Michel Martin of being trapped with her family in her grandmother's home in waist-deep water, in the aftermath of Hurricane Harvey flooding. As Martin noted, listeners could hear the water, seemingly lapping around her, in the background.
"Ever since I heard that, I have been on the verge of tears and waiting to hear if she and her family got rescued," Colorado listener Lara Duran wrote. "Please follow up on this family. I am very concerned. Please, if you are going to do a story on trapped people, please follow up."
That's the power of radio, to create that intimacy between listeners and interview subjects. With that comes a certain responsibility, in my opinion. In this case, listeners need an update on how Wilson and her family fared.
The weekend and weekday All Things Considered staffs are separate; the weekend crew passed Wilson's contact information on to the weekday staff. Christopher Turpin, NPR's vice president of news programming and operations, told me All Things Considered had indeed been trying to reach the family all week, without success. "We are as anxious as those listeners to track Jada and her family down," he wrote in an email, and said the show would update listeners if and when they do.
(While NPR hasn't talked to her, later Sunday night Wilson posted this on Twitter: "UPDATE: we are safer than we were before. Thank you for all of the prayers, concerns and advice. We are finding a place to stay now. Thanks!")
"I'm a huge believer in following up on compelling individual stories at moments like this," Turpin wrote. "In the aftermath of Katrina it was folks we went back to time and time again"— people such as Randy Adams, whose last interview of nine total was in 2015, 10 years after he and his family fled the New Orleans hurricane — "who became like family to our listeners, who really helped us understand the arc of the tragedy."