On Friday, Facebook announced that it had banned Cambridge Analytica, a political consulting firm with ties to President Donald Trump's 2016 election campaign, from using the platform. According to Facebook, "in 2015, we learned that a psychology professor at the University of Cambridge named Dr. Aleksandr Kogan lied to us and violated our Platform Policies by passing data from an app that was using Facebook Login" to Cambridge Analytica and Christopher Wylie. Facebook says that about 270,000 people who downloaded Kogan's app, called "thisisyourdigitallife," gave permission for Kogan to access information about them, such as their locations and posts they liked -- but Kogan violated the rules by sharing it.
Kogan disputes Facebook's claim that he lied about why he was collecting the data.
Wylie helped to found Cambridge Analytica but left in 2014, and now says the firm wrongly used the data to build psychological profiles of 50 million Americans for the Trump campaign.
"Cambridge Analytica will try to pick at whatever mental weakness or vulnerability that we think you have and try to warp your perception of what's real around you," Wylie said in an interview with ABC News. "If you are looking to create an information weapon, the battle space you operate in is social media. That is where the fight happens."
Facebook says it thought the third parties with whom Kogan shared the data had deleted it in response to the social media company's demands, but has now learned they didn't. Cambridge Analytica said in a statement on Saturday that it deleted the data Kogan provided when it became clear that Kogan had not gathered it in line with Facebook's terms of service.
Being profiled in this way by a political campaign is different than being targeted by a company selling shoes, for example, with a Facebook ad. While companies may select Facebook users based upon generic data such as what school they graduated from or what zip code they live in, industry practices prevent advertisers from knowing the personal identities of the people they're targeting. Congress needs to respond now -- in two ways.
First, we need laws that give Americans more information about how data we share online will be used. As I've argued before, organizations asking us to share personally identifiable information on social media should be required to say who they are, from whom they get funding, and how they're going to use the data. This stipulation could help prevent situations like this in the future.
Second, Congress should force Facebook's CEO, Mark Zuckerberg, to testify about what happened. This could shed some light on the shady way this all played out, helping lawmakers figure out how to prevent such episodes from recurring. It would also rightly publicly shame the company for failing to live up to moral obligations it had to its users to be forthcoming and transparent about what it knew.