With the news cycle in hyperdrive ever since the inauguration of President Donald Trump (and even before that), it feels as though most Americans have forgotten about one of the most horrifying examples of government malfeasance and environmental racism in recent memory: the Flint Water Crisis.
It was heartening to see the Michigan city get some attention as a result of Will and Jaden Smith’s eco-friendly water company, which has vowed to donate water to the beleaguered, majority-black city. But it reminded me that what happened in Flint, an hour north of my hometown of Detroit, has largely faded from the public eye. I have friends in Flint, many of whom are still wary of drinking the tap water, even with the free filters provided by the state. When the cameras and celebrities left, thousands of poor, now-poisoned Flint residents, including infants and children, remained. And we’ve all but abandoned them.
On April 25, 2014, Flint officials made the cost-cutting decision to switch the city’s main water supply from the Detroit system to the Flint River. Initially an effort to save $5 million, the decision proved to be more costly than they thought. And shortly after the switch, residents started to complain about discoloration in the water, a taste of “urine” and an odd smell. Rashes and hair loss were also a common complaint.
The river water was dangerously corrosive to the city’s pipes, so much so that a General Motors plant stopped using it because it was eroding car parts. Over a year later, researchers found evidence of dangerously high levels of lead in the water, which finally prompted the city to take action.
While we won’t see the long-term health effects on a city filled with lead-poisoned individuals for another 10 or 20 years, some side-effects of the contaminated water have already occurred. An outbreak of Legionnaires’ disease caused by the water crisis has killed a dozen people. A study discovered a ”horrifyingly large″ increase in fetal deaths and miscarriages in Flint in recent years.
Flint is one of Michigan’s poorest and blackest cities. People of color represent 57 percent of the population and were the primary victims of a system that failed them.
The Michigan Civil Rights Commission said in a report that officials whose decisions caused the crisis ― as well as those who reacted slowly to it ― may not have been racist, but that systemic racism was the real culprit. The report asked if the Flint water crisis would have been allowed to happen in affluent, largely white Michigan communities, such as Ann Arbor or Bloomfield Hills.