Female athletes from a varsity high school soccer team in California served as participants in the current case study. The roster listed 21 athletes, but due to injury, family obligations, academic deficiencies, and mandatory tutoring, only 18 participated in data collection. The athletes ranged in age from 14 to 17 years (mean = 16.28 years), and mostly identified themselves as Hispanic (N = 16). Other ethnicities identified included Black (N = 1) and White (N = 1). None of the athletes had previously participated in a formal sport psychology program or worked with a Sport Psychology Consultant (SPC).
The Head Coach (HC; white female) was also an important participant in the case study. She competed in soccer at both the community college and Division I levels. Though in her first year as HC of the varsity soccer program, she had formerly coached the varsity water polo and swim teams at the same school. When competing at the DI level, the HC had worked with a SPC and she was currently enrolled in a graduate program in Sport Psychology. Due to her strong connection to the study and the insights that she could provide, she joined the research team. She is the third author of the current manuscript, but is referred to as HC as her primary responsibilities were in this role.
The school is in one of the largest school districts within California. The school’s Athletic Director (AD) promotes coach development and has an ongoing mission to increase student-athlete participation, engagement, achievement, and retention. Coaches meet with the AD each season (i.e., preseason, during season, postseason) to discuss how they can integrate these core values in their coaching. After a planning meeting with the AD, the HC contacted the first author to seek assistance with providing sport psychology services to her athletes. Ethical approval for the use of human subjects was obtained from the lead author’s university as well as the school board.
During tryouts, once initial separation of teams (i.e., into Varsity, Junior Varsity, and Freshman) occurred, the HC led a discussion with the tentative Varsity team about the upcoming season, the mission to increase their engagement, and her decision to have them participate in a sport psychology/life skills curriculum (which will now be referred to as UNIFORM). She felt that the team’s participation in UNIFORM would benefit her athletes individually as well as the team as a whole. She communicated this message in team meetings and during tryouts. Players were provided assent and consent forms in English or Spanish. The HC then hosted a parent-athlete meeting to review the upcoming season, at which time the decision to use UNIFORM was again discussed. She explained her decision to have the team participate in UNIFORM and identified potential benefits of this engagement. No parents objected to this decision.