Participants were 213 undergraduate students (128 females) at the University of Oregon with an average age of 19.40 years (SD = 2.32). Due to time limitations and computer errors, 201 participants had complete data on the working memory capacity and attention control tasks, mind-wandering probes, and personality questionnaire. All participants gave informed consent and were given course credit for participation. We collected data with the goal of reaching 200 participants to achieve adequate power for confirmatory factor analysis and structural equation modelling.
After giving informed consent, participants completed three measures of working memory capacity, three measures of attention control, and a personality questionnaire. All tasks were completed in a single laboratory session.
Operation span. Participants solved a series of maths operations while trying to remember a set of unrelated letters. Participants were required to solve a maths operation, and after solving the operation, they were presented with a letter for 1 s. Immediately after the letter was presented the next operation was presented. At recall participants were asked to recall letters from the current set in the correct order by clicking on the appropriate letters. For all of the span measures, items were scored correct if the item was recalled correctly from the current list. Participants were given practice on the operations and letter recall tasks only, as well as two practice lists of the complex, combined task. List length varied randomly from three to seven items, and there were two lists of each list length for a maximum possible score of 50. The score was total number of correctly recalled items
Participants recalled sequences of red squares within a matrix while performing a symmetry-judgment task. In the symmetry-judgment task, participants were shown an 8 × 8 matrix with some squares filled in black. Participants decided whether the design was symmetrical about its vertical axis. The pattern was symmetrical half of the time. Immediately after determining whether the pattern was symmetrical, participants were presented with a 4 × 4 matrix with one of the cells filled in red for 650 ms. At recall, participants recalled the sequence of red-square locations by clicking on the cells of an empty matrix. Participants were given practice on the symmetry-judgment and square recall task as well as two practice lists of the combined task. List length varied randomly from two to five items, and there were two lists of each list length for a maximum possible score of 28. We used the same scoring procedure as that used in the operation span task.