An archival sample of 402 subjects was used in this study. Table 1 presents the characteristics of this sample. As may be seen from the table, the sample is balanced among African-American (36%), Latino (16%), and Caucasian (48%) subjects. Gender balance is 52% female and 48% male.
The following criterion measures were obtained from subjects’ case files: ever diagnosed psychotic, ever diagnosed depressed, ever diagnosed with bipolar disorder, ever diagnosed with borderline personality disorder, and ever diagnosed with antisocial personality disorder. All diagnoses were made by examining psychologists or psychiatrists, documented in professional reports on the subjects. Criteria relating to events in the case history include: ever hospitalized for psychiatric treatment, number of arrests, ever incarcerated in a county jail, and history of violent behavior (including domestic violence, assault/aggravated assault, or homicide). Additionally, in the item development phase, individual items were correlated with either the Millon Clinical Multiaxial Inventory (MCMI)-III scales or Personality Assessment Inventory (PAI) scales cited below. For subjects who had been administered both instruments, only one was employed as a criterion variable.
All records were selected from files accumulated in private forensic psychology practice. All subjects had presented for a psychological evaluation relating to a legal matter. The most common case type was child protective services matters, followed by criminal matters, followed by assessments for professional boards, followed by tort cases. Criteria for case selection in the item development phase included at least one psychological or psychiatric evaluation containing a diagnostic section, adequate case material to document criminal history, drug use, child abuse and other factors, and administration of either the MCMI-III or PAI and the House-Tree-Person as part of an evaluation. Criteria for the cross-validation sample included at least one psychological or psychiatric evaluation containing a diagnostic section, adequate case material to document criminal history, drug use, child abuse and other factors, and administration of the House-Tree-Person. Intellectually disabled subjects were not included in either sample.
One hundred and sixty subjects in the item development sample had been administered the PAI (Morey, 1991) as part of a psychological examination. The main psychopathology scales (as opposed to subscales) and two PAI impression management scales measuring fake-bad and fake-good response sets were recorded for these subjects. Ninety-two subjects in the item development sample had been administered the MCMI-III (Millon, 1997), also as part of a psychological examination. All scores on the MCMI-III were recorded for these subjects. These measures were employed during the preliminary item development phase, and their specific relationships with drawing variables are not reported here.