Participants were recruited in three ways: (1) online (n = 298), from three OCD-related websites (International ObsessiveCompulsive Disorder Foundation, the Houston OCD Program, and the Peace of Mind Foundation); (2) a residential treatment facility (n = 127), the Houston OCD Program; and (3) in person at consumer conferences of the International OCD Foundation (n = 100). All participants completed a battery of measures, including demographic information and assessments for OCD severity. The residential treatment center used in the current study utilizes a structured diagnostic interview at the onset of treatment, the Mini-International Neuropsychiatric Interview (MINI; Sheehan et al., 1998), as well as expert clinical assessments conducted by licensed clinicians specializing in the treatment of OCD. The results of the online and consumer conferences were aggregated across two separate studies. Not all participants completed all of the measures of OCD severity because of responses being collected from separate studies requiring completion of differing measures from their participants (see Table 1). Participants in the online and residential treatment groups were asked to complete the Y-BOCS-SR, the OCIR, and the DOCS, while the conference group was given only the Y-BOCS-SR and the DOCS. Of the original 575 participants recruited, 525 met criteria for study inclusion. Participants were excluded if they were under that age of 18 or did not complete both the WHOS and at least one OCD severity measure. Demographic information is displayed in Tables 2 and 3. Participants were primarily female (60.1%), with a mean age of 34.0 (SD = 12.7; range 18–80). Participant race/ethnicity was 82.7% White, 4.4% Hispanic American, 3.6% Asian/Pacific Islander, 1.9% African American, and 7.5% Other or Withheld.
Yale-Brown Obsessive Compulsive Scale–Self-Report (YBOCS-SR). The Y-BOCS-SR (Steketee, Frost, & Bogart, 1996) is a 10-item self-report scale measuring OCD severity. Items are rated on a 5-point scale from 0 to 4, assessing for time burden, interference, distress, resistance, and control over both obsessions and compulsions. Total scores range from 0 to 40, with scores at or above 16 commonly used as the clinical cutoff for OCD. The Y-BOCS-SR displays good psychometric properties (Steketee et al., 1996).
Obsessive-Compulsive Inventory-Revised (OCI-R). The OCI-R (Foa et al., 2002) is a shortened, 18-item version of the original OCI (OCI; Foa, Kozak, Salkovskis, Coles, & Amir, 1998), measuring OCD severity. Items are rated on a 5-point Likert scale (0 = Not at all to 4 = Extremely). Total scores range from 0 to 72, with scores at or above 21 considered indicative of the likely presence of OCD. The OCI-R displays good psychometric properties.
Dimensional Obsessive-Compulsive Scale (DOCS). The DOCS (Abramowitz et al., 2010) is a 20-item self-report scale that assesses OCD severity dimensionally, including contamination, responsibility for harm and mistakes, symmetry/ordering, and unacceptable thoughts. Each subscale consists of 5 items rated 0 to 4 that assess time burden, avoidance, distress, life interference, and difficulty in disregarding or refraining from obsessions and/or compulsions. Total score ranges from 0 to 80, with scores at or above 18 considered indicative of the likely presence of OCD. The DOCS displays good psychometric properties.