All experimental protocols and consent materials were approved as an Exempt Study by the Indiana University Institutional Review Board. Instructors volunteered to include the study intervention as part of their Introductory Psychology curriculum, and all students of participating sections completed all the study procedures because they were part of the normal instructional activities of the class. A statement about this study was included in the syllabus of participating sections. Participant’s consent to have their data analyzed and included in this study was obtained from all students in compliance with the IRB of Indiana University. Parental consent for this study was waived by the IRB of Indiana University for students under the age of 18 enrolled in the class, because this activity was part of their curricular activities (and was specified as such on the syllabus), and a parent or guardian of any minor would have already consented to their participation in the course.
A total of 2061 (Time 1: N = 678; Time 2: N = 1383) undergraduate students registered in one of the 18 sections of Introduction to Psychology at Indiana University participated in the study as part of their normal class activities and agreed to have their study data and grades included in the analyses for this study. The instructors of the participating section agreed to include the tutorial as an extra-credit homework activity and the posttest questions as part of their first evaluation point. Instructors were unware of the manipulation introduced (except for one section whose instructor was the fourth author). Some instructors taught more than one section in the same or across data collection times.
Students access the tutorial through a website, which randomly assigned them to either the Self-Regulated (N = 1386) or Yoked (N = 657) groups (see details below). Neither the student or the instructor had any a priori knowledge of the condition. The final sample of 2061 students includes 1208 students who were matched to another student (i.e., 604 complete Self Regulated-Yoked dyads). The remaining students (N = 853) either did not have anybody paired with them or the student paired to them was not included in analyses due to not having consented or missing the exam.
Due to the nature of the research conducted and its inclusion as part of normal classroom activities, it was not possible to collect demographic information about the participating participants. However, to characterize the population we present demographic data for the population of students of Introductory Psychology at Indiana University Bloomington for the past 15 years in Table 1.