Participants were 20 Greek male adolescent athletes (Mage = 16.35; SD = 1.00), with 2–10 years of competitive experience in their sport (M = 2.46; SD = 2.8). Participants were football athletes (N = 16), tennis players (N = 2), a sailor, and a fencer. Participants represented all athletes in a sport talent program and were all pupils at the same school in Athens Greece. Convenience sampling was used to recruit participants, whereby information about the study was distributed to all sport talent program athletes, and participants volunteered to take part. The school was informed about the aims and procedures of the study, giving permission for the implementation of the study. Ethical approval was granted by the University, and informed consent and minor assent was gained from participants and their guardians before data collection.
The study employed a single-case AB and ABC betweengroups design (Barker, McCarthy, Jones, & Moran, 2011). More specifically, participants were randomly divided in two groups by flipping a coin, where both groups (REBT+REPDMS group, N = 9; and REBT only group, N = 11) received REBT education workshops, but only the REBT+REPDMS group received REPDMS. To be clear, the REBT+REPDMS group received four 40-min REBT education workshops, followed one week after by an REPDMS session (ABC single-case design). The REBT only group received only the four 40-min REBT education workshops (AB single-case design). Thus, it was possible to assess the effects of REPDMS over and above the effects of REBT education. Data were collected over a 12-week period through baseline (4 weeks), REBT education (4 weeks), REPDMS vs. no REPDMS (one week), and postintervention (three weeks) phases. Baseline data revealed a sufficient level of irrational beliefs to warrant REBT intervention (REBT+REPDMS group, M = 2.89, SD = .06; REBT only group, M = 2.91, SD = .10) based on reported average norms (M = 2.64) for the Shortened General Attitudes and Beliefs Scale (SGABS; Lindner, Kirkby, Wertheim, & Birch, 1999; MacInnes, 2003), and guidelines for using REBT with athletes (M = 2.51; Turner & Barker, 2014). In other words, participants in both groups reported above the norm for irrational beliefs, and therefore were eligible to take part in the study.
The Shortened General Attitudes and Beliefs Scale (SGABS; Lindner et al., 1999) comprises 26 items forming eight subscales. Total irrational beliefs (22 items) is made up of self-depreciation (4 items; e.g., If important people dislike me, it is because I am an unlikable, bad person), other-depreciation (3 items; e.g., If people treat me without respect, it goes to show how bad they really are), need for achievement (4 items; e.g., It’ s unbearable to fail at important things, and I can’t stand not succeeding at them), need for approval (3 items; e.g., When people who I want to like me disapprove of me or reject me, I can’ t bear their disliking me), need for comfort (4 items; e.g., It’ s unbearable being uncomfortable, tense, or nervous, and I can’t stand it when I am), and demand for fairness (4 items; e.g., It is awful and terrible to be treated unfairly by people in my life). A rational beliefs (4 items; e.g., I have worth as a person even if I do not perform well at tasks that are important to me) subscale is also included. For reasons of brevity, only total irrational beliefs and rational beliefs were included in the current study. Participants were asked to indicate the extent that they agreed with each of the 26 statements on a 5-point scale ranging from 1 (strongly disagree) to 5 (strongly agree), with higher scores indicative of stronger beliefs. The SGABS has shown high test-retest reliability in a general population (r = .91; Lindner et al., 1999) and youth athletes (r = .77 to .95; Turner et al., 2014) samples, and acceptable construct, concurrent, convergent, and discriminate validity (MacInnes, 2003). The SGABS was selected for the study due to its prior use in athletic contexts (Turner & Barker, 2013). Across all time points, Cronbach’s a for the rational beliefs subscale was medium and ranged from a = .28 to a = .89 (M = .55, SD = .23), however this value is explained by the small number of rational beliefs statements (N = 4; Nunnally & Bernstein, 1994). Although the SGABS offers only 4 statements for the assessment of rational beliefs, it was preferred to alternative measures (e.g., Rational Beliefs Inventory; RBI; Shorkey & Whiteman, 1977) due to its simplicity in translating into Greek in clear terms. To translate the SGABS, a researcher of Greek origin who is trained in REBT (Certified) and speaks fluent English translated each item from English to Greek. Then, the translation was validated by a third-party who is of Greek origin but whose main language is English. This third person translated the Greek SGABS items back into English. Any discrepancies between the researcher’s and the third party’s translations were discussed and reconciled to form an accurate Greek translation. Concerning irrational beliefs, Cronbach’s a ranged from a = .77 to a = .85 (M = .81, SD = .03).
All participants completed the SGABS at four time points before the intervention to establish the baseline, due to lack of variability anticipated in irrational beliefs (Barker et al., 2011), which should remain stable over short periods of time (e.g., Lindner et al., 1999). All participants received four 40-min REBT education workshops, with each workshop working to specific goals, in compliance with past research and guidelines for group-REBT (Dryden & Neenan, 2002; Dryden & Branch, 2008; Turner et al., 2015). Broadly, participants were educated on the basic notions of REBT and the ABCDE framework and the causal relationship between beliefs and emotions. Participants were also educated on the disputation of irrational beliefs and the promotion of rational beliefs.