We conducted a cross-sectional study using nonprobability convenience sampling methodology. We approached AYA who were 12–22 years old, had SCD patients (all genotypes), were English-speaking and on a steady state dose of hydroxyurea, defined as a stable dose for 2 months or more prior to enrollment in the study. Between January 2015 and December 2015, patients were enrolled before or after their scheduled outpatient comprehensive sickle cell clinic or hydroxyurea clinic appointments. Exclusion criteria included patients with SCD on chronic transfusion support, with any haemoglobin disorder other than SCD, or with any cognitive or physical disability.
We evaluated patients’ perceptions using the brief illness perception questionnaire (B-IPQ), which was adapted to reflect hydroxyurea and SCD [28]. In the adapted B-IPQ, we replaced the word “illness” by “sickle cell disease” and the word “treatment” by “Hydroxyurea”. For example, one of the questions was “How much do you think your hydroxyurea can help your sickle cell disease?” instead of “How much do you think your treatment can help your illness?” In addition, two items were deemed not applicable and/or could be confusing for patients with SCD, and therefore were deleted in the adapted B-IPQ version. The B-IPQ has been extensively utilized in earlier studies and used in patients as young as 8 years of age [27, 28]. The adapted B-IPQ consists of 7 items or dimensions including perceived consequences of SCD, personal control of SCD, control of SCD with hydroxyurea, identity (i.e. SCDrelated symptoms), concerns about SCD, understanding of SCD, and emotional response secondary to having SCD. The “Identity” domain will be referred to as “symptoms” throughout the manuscript. Each item uses a scale from 0 to 10 to assess each dimension, and each item is evaluated as a separate subscale. Higher scores indicate stronger perceptions of each dimension of the B-IPQ. In particular, higher B-IPQ scores indicate more negative perceptions of SCD-related consequences, identity (i.e. more perceived symptoms), concerns, and emotional response, but more positive perceptions of personal control, treatment control, and understanding of SCD.
Study participants were asked to complete Patient Reported Outcomes Measurement Information System – Computerized Adaptive Testing (PROMIS®-CAT) measures using an electronic tablet [29]. PROMIS-CAT is a novel application of a comprehensive, item-response theory optimized item bank, which enables precise estimation of a PRO domain while simultaneously minimizing burden to participants [30, 31]. In CAT, items administered are selected based on informant’s previous item responses, using a pre-set computerized algorithm based on individual item information functions. Therefore, the total number of items used in different PROMIS measures vary within and in-between patients. A number of PROMIS® measures have been validated in the paediatric and adult populations [32–35], and have been recently evaluated in SCD [36, 37]. Adolescents (age 12–17 years) were asked to complete paediatric PROMIS®-CAT measures of fatigue, pain interference, physical functioning mobility and upper-extremity, depression, anxiety, and peer relationships. Young adults (age 18–22 years) were asked to complete adult PROMIS®-CAT measures of fatigue, pain interference, physical functioning mobility and upper-extremity, depression, anxiety, and social isolation. PROMIS peer relationships and social isolation measures have different set of questions, however both evaluate patients’ relationships and social support. All paediatric and most adult PROMIS®- CAT measures elicited participants’ responses based on the previous 7 days using 5-point response options ranging from “with no trouble” to “not able to do” for physical functioning measures and from “never” to “almost always” in all other measures. No timeframe was assigned to adult PROMIS physical functioning measure. Higher PROMIS® domain scores indicated better physical functioning (mobility or upper-extremity), and peer relationships, but worse severity for fatigue, pain interference, depression, anxiety, and social isolation. PROMIS®-CAT paediatric and adult measures were scored on a general population based T-score metric with a mean of 50 and a standard deviation of 10 [32, 38].
Hydroxyurea adherence was evaluated using the ©Modified Morisky Adherence Scale 8-items (©MMAS-8), which was adapted to reflect hydroxyurea and SCD. In the adapted ©MMAS-8, we replaced the words “medicine”, “medication” and “pills” with “Hydroxyurea”. ©MMAS-8 includes 7 yes/no questions and 1 multiple choice question, and evaluates adherence over the past day and 2 weeks [39, 40]. Total ©MMAS-8 numerical scores were calculated per the assessment manual. Higher ©MMAS-8 scores indicated better adherence to hydroxyurea. Based on the total ©MMAS-8 score, three levels of adherence were also considered: low (0 to <6), medium (6 to <8) and high (8).