Sixty-two healthy participants (39 females; age range 18–57; Mage 27.16, SD 7.83) were recruited from the University College London (UCL) Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience Subject Database. Sample size was determined by an a priori power analysis in G Power (Faul, Erdfelder, Lang, & Buchner, 2007). The power analysis was based on the main finding from the reinforced go/no-go task showing that participants are significantly slower to respond in the punished conditions relative to the rewarded conditions, with a Cohen’s dz (within-subjects) effect size of 0.487 (Crockett et al., 2009). Detecting an effect size of this magnitude using a paired t test requires 57 participants at the 0.05 alpha level (two-tailed) with 95% power. The present study recruited 62 participants to allow for a small number of unusable data sets.
Due to a recording fault during the sustained attention to response task (SART), one female participant was excluded, resulting in 61 participants in the SART. Participants reported no history of psychiatric, neurological or substance use disorders and no pacemaker implantation. Participants provided written informed consent and were reimbursed £7.50/hr for participation. To incentivize performance, participants were also informed that they could receive additional financial compensation based on task performance. The study obtained ethical approval from the UCL Research Ethics Committee (Project ID Number: 1764/001) and was conducted in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki. Data and materials for the tasks are freely available for download (https://figshare.com/articles/SART_script/3443093 and https://dx .doi.org/10.6084/m9.figshare.c.3291299.v1).
The ToS procedure is identical to Mkrtchian, Aylward, Dayan, Roiser, and Robinson (2017). Anxiety was induced with the ToS paradigm where unpredictable electric shocks were delivered with two electrodes attached to the nondominant wrist using a Digitimer DS5 Constant Current Stimulator (Digitimer Ltd, Welwyn Garden City, U.K.). A highly unpleasant but not painful (Schmitz & Grillon, 2012) subjective shock level was established using a shock work-up procedure prior to testing. No more than five (to avoid habituation) shocks with a gradually increasing shock level were administered. Participants rated each shock on a scale from 1 (barely felt it) to 5 (unbearable) to reach a shock level of 4. The reinforced go/no-go task was programmed in Psychtoolbox (http:// psychtoolbox.org) and the SART in Cogent (Wellcome Trust Centre for Neuroimaging and Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience, UCL, London, U.K.) using MATLAB (Release 2014a, The MathWorks, Inc., Natick, MA, United States).
Both tasks were presented on a laptop and administered under alternating safe and threat blocks. During the safe block, the background color was blue and the block was preceded by a 4000ms message stating, “You are now safe from shock.” During the threat block, the background color was red and the message, “Warning! You are now at risk of shock” was presented for 4,000 ms at the beginning. Participants were told that they might receive a shock only during the threat condition but that the shocks were not dependent on their performance. At the end of each experimental task, participants retrospectively rated how anxious, stressed and afraid they felt during the safe and threat conditions on a scale from 1 (not at all) to 10 (very much so). Numerous previous studies have implemented this questionnaire to assess effectiveness of the threat condition (Robinson, Vytal, et al., 2013). The reinforced go/no-go task and SART were administered together with a third task (the third task was part of a larger study including a patient group and are published separately: Mkrtchian et al., 2017). All experimental tasks were administered in a counterbalanced order across participants.