The participants were 610 adolescents aged 13 to 20 years (Mage = 16.8; SDage = 1.63; 385 females, 63.1 %). Data were collected by a paper and pencil questionnaire. Participants were recruited from Italian public schools and universities. Written informed consent was obtained by parents on behalf of minor participants. Adult participants were asked to provide a written consent to participate to the study. The majority of participants lived with both parents (78.9 %), or with only one parent (14 %). The parents’ educational levels were as follows: 34.7 % of fathers and 28.4 % of mothers had a middle school degree, 44.7 % of fathers and 51.4 % of mothers had a high school degree, and 20.4 % of fathers and 20.3 % of mothers had a university degree or post-university education. This study and its procedure for data collection were approved by the Ethics Committee of the Department of Dynamic and Clinical Psychology of Sapienza University of Rome.
The participants were initially asked about some personal data, as well as family composition and further information about socio demographics
Sexting behaviors were assessed through the Sexting Behaviors Questionnaire (SBQ; Morelli et al. 2016b), an instrument inspired by the Sexting Behaviors Scale (Dir 2012). The scale was composed of 29 items that evaluated the frequency of different sexting behaviors on a five-point Likert scale, from 1 (never) to 5 (frequently or daily). Sexting was defined as the exchange of provocative or sexually suggestive messages, pictures, or videos via smartphone, Internet, or social networks (a sample item is BHow often have you received provocative or sexually suggestive pictures, messages or videos over the Internet (i.e., Facebook, e-mail, Myspace)?^). The strength of this scale is the deeper assessment of the three subdimensions of sexting: receiving, sending, and publicly posting. For a more detailed description of the scale, see Morelli et al. (2016b). The scale reached a Cronbach alpha of 0.92. The three subdimensions showed good reliability as well: the receiving subscale exhibited a Cronbach alpha of 0.85, with the sending subscale showing 0.84 and the posting subscale showing 0.94.
Alcohol consumption was assessed with the Alcohol Use Disorders Identification Test (AUDIT) (Babor et al. 2001). This scale was developed by the World Health Organization to evaluate alcohol-related problems and the possible risk for individual health. The scale assesses the amount and frequency of drinking, the alcohol addiction, and the problems related to alcohol abuse. In our scale, the participants had to rate eight items on a five-point scale, ranging from 0 (never) to 4 (frequently or daily). A total score for alcohol consumption based on these items was used in this study. In this sample, the scale reached a Cronbach alpha of 0.76.