After receiving university Institutional Research Ethics Board approval, the authors used their connections with various national sport associations and national sport centers to gain a list of potential immigrant athletes who would be suited to the study and extend an initial recruitment invitation for the athletes to participate. This recruitment process was initiated through posted invitations to participate by Skype, with follow-up e-mails sent to the coaching fraternity of nationally accredited coaches and to executive directors from national sport organizations. When a positive response was received from immigrant athletes by their coaches, the athletes’ contact information was forwarded to the first author. Either the first or second author then followed up with the athletes to provide information about the project.
Participants were 24 national- and international-level athletes who had immigrated to Canada during their teenage years and early adulthood. At the time of the interviews, the participants had been living in Canada for an average of 8.6 years. The participants relocated to Canada for nonsport reasons, though all but two were recognized athletes within their home countries before relocation. Hence, these athletes embarked on their acculturation processes during adolescence and continued onward in this process into adulthood. Eighteen of the participants were male, and six were female. At the time of the study the athletes ranged in age from 18 to 32 years (M = 23 years). Participants came from 10 sports: boxing (n = 6), swimming (n = 5), badminton (n = 2), judo (n = 2), karate (n = 2), basketball (n = 2), rugby (n = 2), soccer (n = 1), racquetball (n = 1), and bobsleigh (n = 1). They immigrated to Canada from 20 countries, divided by continents as follows: North America (n = 2), South America (n = 1), Europe (n = 10), Asia (n = 7), Australia (n = 1), and Africa (n = 3).
Given that the participants were geographically dispersed across Canada, the second author met with each individual and conducted data collection over Skype, whereby face-to-face contact was enabled remotely. This particular approach to data collection has recently been termed “computer-mediated interviewing” (see Sparkes & Smith, 2014). A synchronous approach was utilized whereby both researcher and participant used the Internet at the same time (i.e., they meet on the Internet). Sparkes and Smith proposed that Skype interviewing, one form of synchronous interviewing, has various advantages over in-person interviewing. Among these, it is proposed that when the participants and researchers are not sitting physically in the same room, participants might feel comfortable to disclose information that they would have retained had the interview been in person. As well, the use of Skype permitted the researchers to interview audio athletes from across Canada and those training abroad through a medium where physical distance could be overcome.
To begin eliciting stories the participants created drawings that reflected their experiences as immigrant athletes in Canada. The participants were given the choice to create their images in the form of a circle (known as a mandala; see Blodgett et al., 2013), as a flowing river, in the form of a tree, or as a freehand image. Arts-based methods had been used extensively in the coauthors’ earlier projects. During these projects, in keeping with Coholic and LeBreton’s (2007) resilience research, the participants found these activities both enjoyable and conducive with self-disclosure. Within the current project, all of the participants were willing to engage in this activity and chose forms that resonated with them most. Once the participants had created their drawings, the images were used to facilitate conversational interviews. Many of the participants then shared that by connecting their drawings with their stories, they learned more about their own reflections as acculturating newcomer athletes. This unstructured and open-ended type of interviewing was selected for two key reasons. First, aligning with the aim of the present study and its narrative approach, the conversational approach invited rich storytelling. Participants were asked to reflect on their experiences holistically and open-endedly and were encouraged to bring forward narratives that could reveal multiple, intersecting layers of experience. This approach helped to “capture” the multifaceted nature of participants’ lives, rather than gloss over it (McGannon & Smith, 2015; Smith & Sparkes, 2009). Second, the conversational interview facilitated a participatory process (Blodgett & Schinke, 2015; Blodgett, Schinke, McGannon, & Coholic, 2014).