The purpose of the current study was to understand the lived experiences of grieving companion animal owners. Therefore, a qualitative research design utilizing a phenomenological perspective was employed. Institutional review board approval was obtained prior to commencing the research.
The term companion animal is used in this study to refer to domesticated animals who are cared for by and in close relationship with humans. For this study, owners of cats and dogs and one horse participated. Horses are primarily considered livestock, but secondarily also may be considered as companion animals. Participants were recruited from two Midwestern University locations through a companion animal loss support group and an organization within a University Foundation that assists with the memorialization of individuals’ former companion animals. Eleven qualitative interviews were conducted with 10 individual interviews and one couple interview. There were seven female and five male participants, all identifying as Caucasian. The age range was from 44 to 91 years (M ¼ 61.83 years). The education level of participants included one doctorate, two master’s, four bachelor’s, and one associate’s degree, three with some college and one with a high school education. The type of animal loss discussed in the interviews included six dogs, five cats, and one horse.
Participants were invited to complete a semistructured interview regarding their experience with the loss of a companion animal. An interview guide was used to elicit responses. Interviews occurred via phone and in person. The structure of each interview was informed by the research questions. The research questions included the following content areas, as related to the participants’ experience with companion animal loss: (a) description of and relationship with companion animal (and animals in general), (b) circumstances of the loss, (c) experience with veterinarian, (d) responses of support system (family and friends), and (e) experience of grief and healing process. While participants were given no incentive to participate, many reported at the end of the interview gratitude for the opportunity to share the story of their loss about their beloved animals.
A retroductive analytic strategy (Burr, 1973) was utilized to concurrently acknowledge the existing literature and the new information provided by participants. Retroduction involves the usage of both deductive and inductive strategies. Deduced hypotheses from the existing literature and theory were used to initially analyze the data. This supports the usage of the interview guide which was developed based upon the researchers’ clinical expertise in conducting therapy with grieving companion animal owners and the existing literature on companion animal loss. In addition, the coders inductively analyzed the transcripts allowing for new themes to emerge, while still viewing those new themes within the original deductive framework. This analytic strategy was deemed most appropriate for this research as it permits usage of existing literature as the basic framework from which to view the data but also offers flexibility for new themes to emerge so that gaps in the literature can be filled.