Forty participants from the University of Essex took part in this experiment. There were five males and 35 females ranging from 18 to 39 years of age. The mean age was 20.8 years (standard deviation
4.2). All participants confirmed that they were fluent in English.
The materials consisted of a subset of 440 words that were randomly selected for each participant from the Toronto Noun Pool (Friendly, Franklin, Hoffman, & Rubin, 1982). Audio file versions of each word were obtained from Michael Kahana’s Computational Memory Laboratory web site (Kahana, 2010; http://memory.psych.upenn.edu/WordPools). The shortest sound file was 0.350 s; the longest sound file was 0.860 s. Audio files were presented via a Logitech USB Headset 4.330 at a volume comfortable to each participant. The words were presented in 60-point Times New Roman font. The materials were presented on an Apple eMac computer monitor using the Supercard application.
The experiment used a mixed design. The betweensubjects independent variable was the task with two levels (ISR or IFR). There were three within-subjects independent variables: modality with two levels (visual and auditory), list length with seven levels (two, four, five, six, seven, eight, and 12), and serial position with up to 12 levels (serial position 1–12). The main dependent variables were the proportion of words recalled in any order (FR scoring), the proportion of words recalled in the correct serial position (SR scoring), and the probability of initiating recall with the very first list item—that is, Probability of First Recall (PFR)
Serial Position 1.
Participants were tested individually and informed that they would be shown two practice lists, of seven words each, followed by 70 experimental lists of words. Participants were allocated to one of two groups: either the ISR group (where they should remember the words in the correct order), or the IFR group (where they can remember the words in any order). The two practice trials consisted of one visual trial and one auditory trial. The experimental trials were split into two equal blocks of 35 trials each. Each block consisted of only visual trials or auditory trials. The order of the blocks was counterbalanced across participants. In all conditions, the order of the list lengths was randomized, such that each block contained five repetitions of each list length. Participants were not aware of the length of the list in advance of its presentation.