The pilot program was conducted in a migratory slum in Worli, Mumbai. A migratory slum is defined as an area where families live in tents on the street, with polythene sheets as roofs, open drains as toilets, and no access to electricity or sanitation (World Bank: Sanitation). The residents of the Worli community in Mumbai are all Hindu migrants from the Surendranagar and Rajkot villages of the Indian state of Gujarat. The average income of each family in the Worli slum is between 6000 and 10,000 rupees a month, with about six people per household. This equates to about $90–$150 a month, or about 50–83 cents a day per individual, placing most of residents under the extreme poverty line of less than $1.25 a day (World Bank: Poverty). While the male to female ratio is roughly even, women are the primary earners in the household. All children were allowed to participate in the initiative; however, an Adverse Childhood Experiences survey was conducted by all participants before formally enrolling in the curriculum. The ACE survey can be found online (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 2016). This initiative was approved by the ‘‘The Hero Lab’’, a non-profit organization. Written informed consent was obtained from each child’s parents in accordance with the Helsinki II Declaration (Carlson et al. 2004).
The Hero Lab’s Stage 1 curriculum is a 6-month interactive program rooted in positive psychology interventions focused on themes that promote well-being (e.g., grit, empathy, hope). Table 1 lists examples of interventions from the curriculum. The lessons lead to a student-led project, in which participants exercise their strengths and skills in a designthinking process to ideate, prototype, and launch a project in their neighborhood. Classes were held 5 days a week in Worli for 6 months on a large tarp in front of participant’s homes. The curriculum was taught by a trained community leader of the same background in regards to faith (Hindu), language, and geography (same community).
Once enrolled into the curriculum, but prior to its intervention, students were administered the eight following surveys by a Hindi-speaking team member to assess their baseline levels of well-being on specific psychological metrics: the General Happiness Scale, the Meaning in Life Questionnaire (MLQ) for Search (Search for Meaning in Life) and MLQ Presence (Presence of Meaning in Life), the Gratitude Survey, the 12-Item Grit Scale, the Toronto Empathy Questionnaire (TEQ), the Life Orientation Test (LOT-R) for measuring optimism and pessimism, and the Curiosity and Exploration Inventory (CEI-II). The surveys were administered orally due to low literacy levels and literal language translation issues. Copies of the surveys are available online and available upon request.
The primary objective was to see whether through a positive psychology curriculum, the students would be able to implement a project that shows their determination toward improving their community and its future. Secondary objectives were to see if the variables highlighted by the aforementioned surveys were impacted by the positive psychology intervention.