Interpretative phenomenological analysis (IPA; Smith, 1996) is rooted within, and combines both phenomenology (descriptive element) and hermeneutics (interpretive element; Pringle, Drummond, McLafferty, & Hendry, 2011). IPA reflects the authors’ views of constructivism in which the individual and the world are viewed as coconstructing rather than two separate bodies, wherein the researcher plays an interpretive part (Davidsen, 2013; Palmer, Larkin, De Visser, & Fadden, 2010). IPA was chosen as the qualitative approach for this study owing to the central position placed on an individual’s lived experience and their resultant sense-making of these experiences (Smith & Eatough, 2012). Alternative means of data collection have begun to adopt methods of IPA, namely focus groups (Palmer et al., 2010; Tomkins & Eatough, 2010). Using an approach through which multiple perspectives of a given phenomenon can be shared is considered to uncover both implicit thoughts and subconscious opinion (Tomkins & Eatough, 2010). As a result, focus groups can build a deeper experiential understanding of a given phenomenon due to the dynamic interplay between participants (Liamputtong, 2011).
Supervisors associated with either the BPS or BASES, were identified via their accrediting body’s website, and emailed to request permission to contact their supervisees. Primary contact with supervisors was intended for recruitment of individuals from the same supervisory group. It was considered that participants sharing the same supervisor were likely to have had previous group reflections and would not therefore be averse to sharing knowledge and experiences in a discursive environment. In some instances supervisors did not run group supervision; however this method of contact enabled greater ease when organizing focus groups due to participants residing in relative proximity to each other.
In total 16 supervisors across England and Wales were initially contacted. Due to nonresponse, or difficulties organizing a suitable date and time for all individuals, the final participant sample represented eight supervisory groups. All participants were enrolled on a training program toward either chartered psychologist (BPS) or an accredited sport and exercise scientist (BASES). The final sample of participants represented a homogenous group to align with IPA guidelines (Smith & Eatough, 2012). Across the sample were minor discrepancies between participants, including group and individual supervision, as well as variation in the stage of training, i.e., at the start, middle, and end of this process. Following institutional ethical approval and informed consent, the sample included seven males (age: M = 31.71 years, SD = 9.32 years), and 12 females (age: M = 25.33 years, SD = 1.37 years), creating five focus groups, comprising between three to five participants. Liamputtong (2011) and Litosseliti (2003) advise that smaller participant numbers in focus groups elicit greater contribution from each member, allowing for better articulation of opinion.
A natural human behavior is to discuss perceptions and opinions of specific topics in a group setting; consequently focus groups appeal to the ordinary conversation and social interaction of everyday life (Colucci, 2007; Litosseliti, 2003). Heightened interaction and sense making between participants therefore create opportunity to uncover implicit perceptions regarding observation experiences (Liamputtong, 2011; Tomkins & Eatough, 2010). To align with the principles of IPA, the researcher adopted the role of a moderator and ensured that focus groups were participant-led (Smith & Eatough, 2012). Through assuming a position as moderator, the researcher can actively engage participants and encourage discussion between group members, rather than between moderator and participant (Liamputtong, 2011).