This study applied qualitative methods to capture an emic account (Jary & Jary, 2000) of practitioners’ professional practice and understanding and use of MI. Data were collected in the form of one-to-one semistructured interviews. This type of informal interview permits the interviewer to use a conversational style and ask spontaneous questions while maintaining focus on a specific topic (Patton, 2002).
Participants were Chartered sport and exercise psychologists, Registered with the British Psychological Society (BPS) and the Health and Care Professions Council (HCPC). A purposeful sample (Patton, 2002) of 18 UK-based sport and exercise psychologists was contacted via e-mail (available to the public through the BPS website) to participate voluntarily in this study. To qualify for inclusion, participants were also qualified to supervise sport and exercise psychologists in training, and currently working in an applied setting with athletes. Of the 18 participants contacted, 11 (8 males, 3 females) aged between 37 and 65 years (44.5 ± 8.3 years) agreed to take part in the study. Participants had between 10 and 35 years (19.6 ± 7.78 years) of experience, and all had worked with professional, international or Olympic athletes. Participants had worked with athletes from team and individual sports, such as rugby, football, equestrian, judo and shooting. Participants had also worked with youth and adult athletes, and able-bodied and disabled athletes.
Two pilot interviews were conducted; one with a BPS chartered sport and exercise psychologist, and one with a BPS sport and exercise psychologist in training. The purpose of this was to test the interview guide, check clarity, and practice interviewer skills. Each member of the research team contributed to the final interview guide (Appendix). Questions in the interview guide focused on key themes concerning professional practice and applied techniques, therapeutic alliance, and awareness and use of MI. Questions included, “When you first start working with a client, how do you begin to build a relationship/ alliance with them?” and “Which specific communication skills do you employ to underpin your work?” Interviews were then conducted with participants, using the finalised interview guide.
Participants were sent information sheets before their interviews, which stated the aim of the study and gave a brief description of the interview procedure. A consent form highlighted participant anonymity and detailed their right to withdraw. Voluntary, written, informed consent was given by all participants. Ethics approval was provided by the governing institution (HWB-S&E-38, Sheffield Hallam University). Participants were afforded an opportunity to ask questions before commencement of their interview, and demographic information was collected at this point. All interviews were conducted by the principal researcher, who has previously conducted interview-based research, is a sport and exercise psychologist in training with the BPS, and a member of the Motivational Interviewing Network of Trainers (MINT). Ten interviews took place using video conferencing software, and one was face-to-face. Video software was used to accommodate participants since they were spread across the UK. Interviews lasted approximately 60 min, were audio recorded and transcribed verbatim.