Sixteen undergraduates recruited from the subject pool at the National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology (Tsukuba, Japan) participated for pay in this and the following Experiments 2–5. All participants reported normal or corrected-to-normal visual acuity and normal colour vision.
In this and the following experiments, stimuli were displayed on a CRT monitor controlled by a computer using MATLAB software and the Psychophysics Toolbox (Brainard, 1997; Kleiner, Brainard, & Pelli, 2007; Pelli, 1997) at a viewing distance of approximately 60 cm. The stimuli were adapted from those used in a typical temporal letter-search task with peripheral distractors (Folk et al., 2002; Leber & Egeth, 2006). The stimulus sequences consisted of letters selected randomly from the English alphabet, excluding I, O, Q, and Z, with the constraint that the letter selected was not one of the two immediately preceding items in both streams and that the two concurrently presented letters differed from each other. One stream was presented 1.2° above the centre of the screen, and the other steam was presented 1.2° below the centre. The letters appeared in BorisBlackBloxx font and subtended a visual angle of approximately 1.0° in height and 0.8–1.2° in width (stroke = 0.2°). The target colour was chosen from among blue (RGB palette value: 0, 0, 255), orange (255, 102, 0), magenta (255, 153, 204), cyan (0, 204, 255), dark yellow (128, 128, 0), purple (128, 0, 128), and red (255, 0, 0). Two colours were chosen from the rest for the non-target items in the two streams: one colour for the top stream and the other for the bottom. The distractor frame consisted of six hash signs (i.e., #) of the same height as the letters, flanking both streams and the central fixation point (2.0° to the right and left, see Figure 1). One of the hash signs in the middle row (right or left side, determined randomly on every trial) was yellow (255, 255, 0), green (0, 255, 0), or the same colour as the target. The other hash signs in the distractor frame were grey (128, 128, 128). All stimuli were presented on a black background.
Observers were instructed to maintain fixation at the centre of the screen and to identify an oddballcoloured target that appeared unpredictably and with equal probability in either the top or the bottom stream. Each trial started with a 500-ms fixation display of a dot (0.1° × 0.1°) in the centre of the screen once the observers pressed the space bar. Two rapid sequences of 20 letters appeared simultaneously above and below the fixation point following a 500- ms blank interval (Figure 1). Target colour was assigned randomly from seven possible colours (blue, orange, magenta, cyan, dark yellow, purple, and red were used for half of the observers; green was used instead of red for the other half). The colour of the target and that of non-target items in the two streams differed from each other. The colours were randomly assigned during every trial. As a result, observers were forced to adopt the singleton-detection mode for each stream because they were not informed of the target colour for every trial. The target was chosen randomly from the letters, and the nontargets were chosen from the remaining letters without selecting the same letter in successive frames. The temporal position of the target varied randomly from item 12 to 15 of the stream. Each item was presented for 67 ms, followed by a 50-ms blank interval before the next item was presented, resulting in 117 ms of stimulus onset asynchrony. The onsets and offsets of the items in the two streams were synchronized. Following the study by Folk et al. (2002), a distractor frame, when present, preceded the target frame by two frames (233 ms). The side on which the oddball-coloured distractor (singleton) appeared was determined randomly from trial to trial.
The critical independent variable was the type of distractor. Under the same-colour condition, the distractor singleton was the same colour as the target of that trial. Under the different-colour condition, the colour of the distractor singleton (green, yellow, or grey) differed from the target. No distractor was presented under the distractor-absent condition, which served as a control. Observers were required to ignore the distractors and identify the target letter by pressing a corresponding key on the keyboard after all stimuli were presented. When an incorrect response was made, an alarm sounded through headphones. The same number of trials (120 trials) was assigned for each of the three conditions, and the trials were randomly ordered throughout the experimental session. Observers participated in 24 practice trials before the start of the experimental trials. To familiarize observers with the procedure, practice began at a very slow presentation rate, with the rate gradually increased to full speed for practice trial 12. The accuracy scores for the practice trials were excluded from analyses in this and the following experiments.