Seven athletes (4 male, 3 female) were recruited to take part in the study. They represent a range of different sports (Rifle Shooting, 3; Athletics, 1; Football, 1; Fencing, 1; Swimming, 1) and have all competed at professional, national or international level (including Woman’s Premier South, World Championships, World Cups, European Championships, British Championships, Commonwealth games, and Paralympics games). In accordance with Swann and colleagues (2015), participants therefore represented competitive-elite and successfulelite athlete populations. Participants were aged 20–68 years (M = 33.29, SD= 16.40) and were selected from a range of sports to provide and explore different contexts of counterfactuals. To provide free recollections of counterfactuals, participants were also required to be involved in regular training and have recently competed.
A qualitative interview methodology was u to explore the nature of counterfactuals and their perceived consequences in elite athletes. Semistructured interviews were conducted to gather participant data underpinned by a phenomenological perspective, which aims to understand the athlete’s personal lived experience of a phenomenon (Smith & Osborn, 2003). In relation to the phenomenological approach, an Interpretative Phenomenological Analysis (IPA; Smith,1996) was used to analyze the data obtained as it ‘‘offers psychologists the opportunity to learn from the insights of the experts—research participants themselves’’ (Reid, Flowers, & Larkin, 2005, p. 20).
The semistructured interview schedule was constructed to suit the use of IPA and follow the guidelines set by Smith (1995) and Smith and Osborn (2003). The interviews were designed to allow the interviewer to frame questions in a broad and open manner and to prompt for more detail if needed. Using suggestions by Smith and Osborn (2003), the first section of the interview was designed to build rapport with participants, through the discussion of their history in their particular sport, their season so far and then a discussion of a recent competitive event to explore the use of counterfactuals and their perceived consequences.
Participants were asked to recall their personal experience of counterfactuals and their perceived consequences around a recent event. A general open question ‘Tell me about your personal experience of a recent positive/ negative event that you thought could have turned out differently. . . ’ was used to get a detailed outline of the event and the counterfactuals experienced. From this, the interviewer used probing questions to get more details on the counterfactual’s type (e.g., upward or downward), content, direction (e.g., self or others), structure (e.g., additive or subtractive), controllability and their perceived consequences (e.g., thoughts, behaviors and emotions). These probing questions were designed to be a ‘gentle nudge from the interviewer’ (Smith & Osborn, 2003) to reduce researcher bias and avoid leading the participant to a predetermined conclusion. As most of the initial counterfactuals were of an upward nature, the process was repeated to explore downward counterfactuals during the specified events. A draft of the interview schedule was piloted in an interview carried out with a novice squash player. This informed the final draft of the interview schedule.