Grounded theory methodology aims to explain a general pattern of behaviour (Glaser & Strauss, 1967). In the present study a constructivist, grounded theory was chosen according to Charmaz (2014), who stresses that the “researcher is a part of what they study, not separate from it” (Charmaz, 2014, p. 320).
The women were recruited retrospectively from participants in a randomized controlled trial (RCT) evaluating web-based support carried out in Sweden for women with T1DM during pregnancy and up to 6 months after childbirth (MODIAB-Web). Women from both the intervention and control groups at three of the six included hospitals were asked to participate. The health care in the respective hospitals differed somewhat. In pregnancy all women with T1DM had frequent follow-ups at a hospital-based special antenatal care unit, which ended with a final followup around 6 weeks after birth. Parental leave in Sweden is financed by the Swedish Social Insurance Agency and the employer, and parents can use 480 days of paid parental leave for each child. Most of these days can be divided between the parents. The majority of mothers take full-time leave during the first months after birth (the Swedish Social Insurance Agency, 2010).
Based on a purposeful sampling procedure, eligible women were contacted by phone after data collection for the MODIAB-Web study was completed, that is, at least 6 months after childbirth, and asked about their willingness to participate in the present study. Of 18 women contacted, 4 declined and 14 agreed to participate. Interviews were conducted between 2014 and 2016. The participants had a median diabetes duration of 24 years (range 5–30). Their median age was 33 years (range 25–40); eight of them were primiparous and six were multiparous. One woman was single, and the others were living with the father of the child. Most women had a university degree (n = 8), five had completed secondary school, and one primary school.
The interviews were conducted 7–17 months after childbirth by three different researchers at a place chosen by the women. Five interviews were conducted by telephone due to distance. Each interview started with open-ended questions such as “Could you please tell me how you would describe your situation as a new mother with type 1 diabetes and how you handle your situation as a new mother with type 1 diabetes?” In accordance with the methodology, follow-up questions were posed, based on emergent data from previously analysed interviews (Corbin & Strauss, 2008). The interviews lasted 25–60 min and were audiotaped and transcribed verbatim.