Twenty-eight Russian-speaking volunteers (age 18–35 years) gave informed consent to participate in the study. All participants were students who were at or had graduated from a university, had normal or corrected vision, and reported no history of language disorders. They were tested on the premises of Moscow State University or St Petersburg State University.
Twenty-eight Russian-speaking volunteers (age 18–35 years) gave informed consent to participate in the study. All participants were students who were at or had graduated from a university, had normal or corrected vision, and reported no history of language disorders. They were tested on the premises of Moscow State University or St Petersburg State University. Material B) that followed the same sentence structure as that shown in (3). For the completion task the sentences such as (3) were truncated after the second or the third NP, yielding two accusative and two genitive conditions listed in Table 1. Across all sets, the critical second NP was an inanimate plural noun in order to avoid ambiguity between genitive and accusative forms found in other Russian nouns (see Footnote 2).4 Participants had to provide a natural completion for each sentence fragment (they were instructed to skip any fragments that they considered ungrammatical). If Russian speakers can resort to genitive-of-negation in order to license a genitive NP, continuations containing a negated embedded verb in both genitive conditions should be expected. The rate of such completions was predicted to be lower in the Gen-only condition than in the Gen+Dat condition, as the former also allows a completion with a monotransitive quirky verb that takes the genitive NP as a direct object. The two accusative conditions were used for estimating a “baseline” rate of negative completions in a case where either an affirmative or a negative continuation is available
Each participant filled out a paper questionnaire with 20 sentences to complete—that is, eight experimental sentences (two items for each of four conditions in Table 1) interspersed with 12 filler sentences.