Articles were located through a PsycInfo search (search terms: “Oxford House;” National Institute on Drug Abuse grants “DA13231,” “DA19935,” and DA16037”; National Institute of Health, Institute on Minority Health and Health Disparities grant “#5R24MD002748”) and were cross-referenced with records maintained by XX University. Articles were included in the current study if they focused in whole or in part on Oxford Houses or their residents. We included articles from peer-reviewed journals and one book chapter that had empirical data. Magazine articles and non-peer reviewed journal articles were excluded. The aforementioned inclusion criteria resulted in a total sample size of 126 peer-reviewed articles (including the one book chapter). These articles were published between 1995 and July 2015. For the purpose of coding study design and types of data analysis, we only included articles that reported data analyses; thus, 12 theoretical or review articles were excluded from further analysis, resulting in a subsample of 114 empirical articles with data. We had hoped to find articles from different research teams, but instead, we found that all of the articles included authors who were currently or previously associated with the DePaul University team conducting the present review.
The study design coding scheme was created using study designs presented in previous research and advanced psychology research methods textbooks (e.g., Bodner, 2006; Goodwin, 2005; Montero & Leon, 2007). The research team integrated the study designs presented in these resources to create the following categories: (a) descriptive studies using systematic observation, (b) cross-sectional descriptive studies through survey research, (c) longitudinal studies through survey research, (d) experiments, between-subjects designs, (e) experiments, within-subjects designs, (f) quasi-experiments, (g) ex post facto, retrospective studies, (h) ex post facto, prospective studies, (i) measure development studies, (j) ethnographic studies, (k) case studies, (l) action research studies, (m) qualitative interviews, and (n) mixed methods studies.
In some cases, a guideline set by one resource was modified to parallel guidelines from other resources and capture the extent of the research articles surveyed. For example, Montero and Leon (2007) advise that cross-sectional and longitudinal descriptive studies are solely descriptive and should not have hypotheses; however, many Oxford House articles were descriptive in nature but still proposed hypotheses based on existing theory and research. With consultation from the third author, the first and second authors developed this coding scheme. The first author coded all of the articles, and the first and second authors coded a subsample of articles, with high levels of agreement. If a question about coding arose, a discussion between all authors took place to make a final coding decision.
For coding data analyses, every analysis employed in a research article was counted to obtain the total number of times the analysis was used across all Oxford House research studies. Additionally, the main or most important analysis was coded in every study to create a count of the number of times the analysis technique was used as the main analysis among all Oxford House research articles.