Thirty-three native British English speakers participated in the current experiment. However, only the data from 30 participants (23 females; mean age 24.8, range 18 – 401 ) were analysed: one participant was excluded for exceeding age requirements and two participants were excluded because of a software error, which prevented task completion. All participants reported that they had no language, hearing or vision impairments (other than corrected-to-normal vision) and had lived in the U.K. for the majority of their lives, speaking English as their first language from birth. Participants were recruited via the University College London online recruitment system or advertisements on the university campus and paid the standard rate at the time of £6/hour2 .
Sixty ambiguous words (e.g., bark, cabinet) were selected from a pretested set that had assessed dominance using a standard word association test (Warren, Vitello, Devlin & Rodd, in preparation; see the Appendix for ambiguous word list). These words had a dominance rating of 12– 42% for the subordinate meaning (mean of 25%). In all cases the primed subordinate meaning had the same pronunciation and spelling as the dominant meaning, although in some cases there was an additional meaning with a different spelling (e.g., ‘break/brake’). Polysemous words were also included as long as the related meanings were judged by the author as sufficiently distinct that they could be distinguished on the basis of word association responses (e.g., typical associates related to the two related meanings of ‘wave,’ disturbance in water or hand gesture, were deemed sufficiently distinct, whereas those to the two meanings of ‘passage,’ corridor/tunnel or journey over time/distance, were not. Thirty-eight words were classed as polysemous; Parks, Ray, & Bland, 1998).
For the subordinate prime task, a total of 60 short paragraphs (mean length of 70 words) were composed in the style of a media or literature excerpt (see supplementary materials for paragraphs). Each paragraph contained at least one of the 60 ambiguous words, disambiguated towards the subordinate meaning3 . For the three repetition condition, the ambiguous word was used in the paragraph three times and was therefore massed in presentation (i.e., the three repetitions appeared in quick succession, within the same paragraph). The first presentation of the word always occurred in the first sentence, with the second and third repetitions distributed throughout the remainder of the paragraph, e.g.,‘The cabinet concluded that a referendum would be unnecessary, since the time it would use might only worsen the financial situation. The cabinet had been in talks for several weeks about a plethora of problems, but had only discussed the idea of a referendum over the last few days. Their decision was not a popular one, since previous cabinets held many referenda, which had proven popular with the public.’
For the one repetition condition, the paragraphs were identical to the three repetition condition except that the second and third repetitions were replaced with a substitute word of a similar meaning. This was done to remove the instance of the ambiguous word itself without altering the global meaning or length of the paragraph. For example, the one repetition version of the passage above was created by replacing ‘cabinet’/‘cabinets’ in the second and third sentence with ‘politicians.’ To fully control the number of repetitions, the ambiguous words did not appear anywhere in the experiment except for their respective priming paragraphs and in the test task. The paragraphs were spoken by a British English speaker (Jennifer M. Rodd) and were digitally recorded in a sound-proof booth. For each paragraph, we created a written summary sentence (mean length 8.8 words), and participants rated how well this sentence summarised the paragraph (to encourage close attention to the paragraph; see Procedure). The summary for a given item was the same for both the one and three subordinate prime conditions. All summaries were designed to be a similarly reasonable level of quality (as quality-judgment/relatedness was the task for the participants, as explained in the Procedure)