WASHINGTON — President Trump tapped CNBC commentator Larry Kudlow on Wednesday to head his National Economic Council, the post vacated when Gary Cohn resigned because of his opposition to the president’s steel tariffs.
Kudlow has also been a staunch opponent of trade barriers. But Trump's appointment of his longtime friend and loyalist may say more about Kudlow's evolving views than Trump's.
"If it comes to that, I would be in favor targeted tariff and tax increases on China until they play ball and come to the table with us," Kudlow told CNBC Wednesday. "I've known the president a long time. We have a mutual admiration society. He is the president. He has a different role, and I will abide by that."
White House press secretary Sarah Huckabee Sanders confirmed the move after it was first reported by Kudlow's network. She said the timing of the appointment hadn't been determined. 
Trump had signaled Kudlow was the leading contender on Tuesday, saying he and Kudlow had come to an understanding on tariffs.
"He now has come around to believing in tariffs as also a negotiating point. I'm renegotiating trade deals and without tariffs we wouldn't do nearly as well," Trump said Tuesday.
One of the first economists to back his 2016 campaign for president, Kudlow served as an informal economic adviser to the campaign.
Kudlow, 70, worked in the Reagan administration as associate director for economics and planning at the Office of Management and Budget. As director of Trump's National Economics Council, he would likely be the president's most visible voice on issues of jobs, taxes and trade.
Before joining the business news cable channel CNBC, Kudlow was chief economist at investment bank Bear Stearns & Co.
In 1994, Kudlow publicly acknowledged to The New York Timesthat he had developed an addiction to drugs and alcohol at Bear Stearns, but that he had undergone 15 months of treatment at that point to kick the habits.
In a tearful interview on CNBC, Kudlow thanked the network, which he said "gave me a second chance after my crash and burn."
"I love this place. I'm honored to take this position. It's an enormous honor. My life has had twists and turns, as people know," he said. "With God's grace I'll have 23 years clean and sober in a few months. That made it all possible."
Kudlow's official title will be assistant to the president for economic policy and director of the National Economic Council. The post does not require Senate confirmation.