WASHINGTON — As students across the country protested congressional inaction on gun violence, the House on Wednesday overwhelmingly passed legislation to help schools identify potential threats — hours after an FBI official told senators at a hearing about missed tips that pointed to the danger of the alleged Parkland, Fla. mass shooter.
A parent at that Senate Judiciary Committee hearing blamed those lapses and others for the Valentine’s Day massacre at Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School.
"The testament to their failure is 17 dead children and teachers, 17 more with life altering injuries, a burden we must bear forever," said Ryan Petty, whose daughter, Alaina Petty, was among the slain students.
But a language arts teacher who survived the attack pointed the finger at Congress, saying its inability to enact gun control legislation is allowing mass shootings to happen. Increased funding for mental health programs and school security will have positive effects, but "mass shootings will not stop until we rid society of the weapons that make them possible,” Katharine Posada told senators.
The Senate hearing focused on the government’s response to the shooting and legislative proposals to improve school safety as students from nearly 3,000 schools staged National School Walkout events to urge lawmakers to do more to address gun violence.
Senate Judiciary Committee Chairman Chuck Grassley, R-Iowa, said Congress must rally around "consensus, evidenced-based solutions" to protect young people from violent attacks.
But gun-control advocates say they expect more from Congress than additional school security. They are calling for an expansion of background checks, a ban on "assault weapons" and high-capacity magazines, and other measures.
"High school students who have lost their friends are literally begging us to take action," said Sen. Dianne Feinstein, of California, the committee's ranking Democrat and one of the most vocal proponents of gun control.
Hundreds of students rallied outside the White House, calling out President Trump and the National Rifle Association with signs and chanting, “No more silence. End gun violence!”
Gun-control measures are unlikely to advance in the GOP-controlled Congress. The less controversial school safety bill that passed the House 407-10 does nothing to curb access to guns, but it marks Congress’s first legislative action in response to the Florida shooting.
The bill, which is backed by the NRA, would fund training for students, school personnel and law enforcement to detect early signs of violence. It would also fund threat assessments and “anonymous reporting systems” such as phone apps, hotlines and websites for threats of school violence.
"As we saw in Florida, students and families saw obvious red flags and warned authorities repeatedly about their concerns for the shooter’s mental health," said House Majority Leader Kevin McCarthy, R-Calif. "At the same time, schools are currently open targets for would-be attackers."
Though the bill passed with bipartisan support, House Democrats on Wednesday complained that lawmakers are not doing enough to stop gun violence.